During the first three years after independence, the federal
 government was an NPC-NCNC coalition, despite the conflicting natures of
 the two partners. The former was regionalist, Muslim, and aristocratic;
 the latter was nationalist, Christian, and populist. Moreover, the NCNC
 supported opponents of the NPC in regional elections in the Northern
 Region. Although a more natural ideological alignment of the Action
 Group and the NCNC was called for by some Action Group leaders, it held
 no attraction for the NCNC as long as the NPC was assured of a
 parliamentary majority.

Domination of the Northern Region by the NPC and NCNC control of the
 Eastern Region were assured. Action Group control of the Western Region,
 however, was weakened and then collapsed because of divisions within the
 party that reflected cleavages within Yoruba society. This loss of
 stability in one region gradually undermined the political structure of
 the whole country.

The leadership of the Action Group, which formed the official
 opposition in the federal parliament, split in 1962 as a result of a
 rift between Awolowo and Akintola, prime minister of the Western Region.
 Awolowo favored the adoption of democratic socialism as party policy,
 following the lead of Kwame Nkrumah's regime in Ghana. The radical
 ideology that Awolowo expressed was at variance with his earlier
 positions, however, and was seen as a bid to make the Action Group an
 interregional party that drew support across the country from educated
 younger voters, whose expectations were frustrated by unemployment and
 the rising cost of living. Akintola, in reaction, attempted to retain
 the support of conservative party elements who were disturbed by
 Awolowo's rhetoric. He called for better relations with the NPC and an
 allparty federal coalition that would remove the Action Group from
 opposition and give its leaders greater access to power.

Awolowo's radical majority staged the expulsion of Akintola from the
 party. The governor of the Western Region demanded Akintola's
 resignation as prime minister (although he had not lost a vote of
 confidence in the regional legislature) and named a successor
 recommended by the Action Group to head the government. Akintola
 immediately organized a new party, the United People's Party, which
 pursued a policy of collaboration with the NPC-NCNC government in the
 federal parliament.

Akintola's resignation in May 1962 sparked bloody rioting in the
 Western Region and brought effective government to an end as rival
 legislators, following the example in the streets, introduced violence
 to the floor of the regional legislature. The federal government
 declared a state of emergency, dissolved the legislature, and named a
 federal administrator for the Western Region. One of his first acts was
 to place many Action Group leaders under house arrest.

Investigations by the federal administrator led to accusations of
 criminal misuse of public funds against Awolowo and other Action Group
 leaders. A special commission found that Awolowo had funneled several
 million pounds from public development corporations to the Action Group
 through a private investment corporation when he was prime minister of
 the Western Region in the 1950s. The regional government seized the
 corporation's assets and pressed legal claims against the Action Group.

In the course of the financial investigation, police uncovered
 evidence linking Awolowo with a conspiracy to overthrow the government.
 With a number of other Action Group leaders, he was arrested and put on
 trial for treason. Authorities charged that 200 activists had received
 military training in Ghana and had smuggled arms into Nigeria in
 preparation for a coup d'état. Awolowo was found guilty, along with
 seventeen others, and was sentenced to ten years in prison. Anthony
 Enahoro, Awolowo's chief lieutenant who had been abroad at the time of
 the coup, was extradited from Britain and also was convicted of treason
 and imprisoned.

In the meantime, the state of emergency was lifted and Balewa,
 determining that Akintola had been improperly dismissed, obtained his
 reinstatement as prime minister of the Western Region at the head of a
 coalition between the NCNC and the United People's Party. The Action
 Group successfully contested the legality of this action in the courts,
 but a retroactive amendment to the Western Region's constitution that
 validated Akintola's reappointment was quickly enacted. As Balewa told
 parliament, the legalities of the case "had been overtaken by
 events."

Later in 1963, Nigeria became a republic within the Commonwealth. The
 change in status called for no practical alteration of the
 constitutional system. The president, elected to a five-year term by a
 joint session of the parliament, replaced the crown as the symbol of
 national sovereignty and the British monarchy as head of state. Azikiwe,
 who had been governor general, became the republic's first president.