British colonialism created Nigeria, joining diverse peoples and
 regions in an artificial political entity. It was not unusual that the
 nationalism that became a political factor in Nigeria during the
 interwar period derived both from an older political particularism and
 broad pan-Africanism rather than from any sense of a common Nigerian
 nationality. Its goal initially was not self-determination, but rather
 increased participation in the governmental process on a regional level.
 Inconsistencies in British policy reinforced cleavages based on regional
 animosities by attempting simultaneously to preserve the indigenous
 cultures of each area and to introduce modern technology and Western
 political and social concepts. In the north, appeals to Islamic
 legitimacy upheld the rule of the emirs, so that nationalist sentiments
 there were decidedly anti-Western. Modern nationalists in the south,
 whose thinking was shaped by European ideas, opposed indirect rule,
 which had entrenched what was considered to be an anachronistic ruling
 class in power and shut out the Westernized elite.

The ideological inspiration for southern nationalists came from a
 variety of sources, including prominent American-based activists such as
 Marcus Garvey and W.E.B. Du Bois. Nigerian students abroad joined those
 from other colonies in pan-African groups, such as the West African
 Students Union, founded in London in 1925. Early nationalists tended to
 ignore Nigeria as the focus of patriotism; rather, the common
 denominator was based on a newly assertive ethnic consciousness,
 particularly Yoruba and Igbo. Despite their acceptance of European and
 North American influences, the nationalists were critical of colonialism
 for its failure to appreciate the antiquity of indigenous cultures. They
 wanted self-government, charging that only colonial rule prevented the
 unshackling of progressive forces in Africa.

Political opposition to colonial rule often assumed religious
 dimensions. Independent Christian churches had emerged at the end of the
 nineteenth century because many European missionaries were racist and
 blocked the advancement of a Nigerian clergy. European interpretations
 of Christian orthodoxy also refused to allow the incorporation of local
 customs and practices, even though the various mission denominations
 themselves interpreted Christianity very differently. It was acceptable
 for the established missions to differ, but most Europeans were
 surprised and shocked that Nigerians would develop new denominations
 independent of European control. Christianity long had experienced
 "protestant" schisms; the emergence of independent Christian
 churches in Nigeria was another phase of this history. The pulpits of
 the independent congregations provided one of the few available avenues
 for the free expression of attitudes critical of colonial rule.

In the 1920s, there were several types of associations that were
 ostensibly nonpolitical. One group consisted of professional and
 business associations, such as the Nigerian Union of Teachers, which
 provided trained leadership for political groups; the Nigerian Law
 Association, which brought together lawyers, many of whom had been
 educated in Britain; and the Nigerian Produce Traders' Association, led
 by Obafemi Awolowo.

Ethnic and kinship organizations that often took the form of a tribal
 union also emerged in the 1920s. These organizations were primarily
 urban phenomena that arose after large numbers of rural migrants moved
 to the cities. Alienated by the anonymity of the urban environment and
 drawn together by ties to their ethnic homelands--as well as by the need
 for mutual aid--the new city dwellers formed local clubs that later
 expanded into federations covering whole regions. By the mid-1940s, the
 major ethnic groups had formed such associations as the Igbo Federal
 Union and the Egbe Omo Oduduwa (Society of the Descendants of Oduduwa),
 a Yoruba cultural movement, in which Awolowo played a leading role.

A third type of organization that was more pointedly political was
 the youth or student group, which became the vehicle of intellectuals
 and professionals. They were the most politically conscious segment of
 the population and stood in the vanguard of the nationalist movement.
 Newspapers, some of which were published before World War I, provided
 coverage of nationalist views.

The opportunity afforded by the 1922 constitution to elect a handful
 of representatives to the Legislative Council gave politically conscious
 Nigerians something concrete to work on. The principal figure in the
 political activity that ensued was Herbert Macauley, often referred to
 as the father of Nigerian nationalism. He aroused political awareness
 through his newspaper, the Lagos Daily News, while leading the
 Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP), which dominated elections in
 Lagos from its founding in 1922 until the ascendancy of the National
 Youth Movement (NYM) in 1938. His political platform called for economic
 and educational development, Africanization of the civil service, and
 self-government for Lagos. Significantly, however, Macauley's NNDP
 remained almost entirely a Lagos party, popular only in the area with
 experience in elective politics.

The NYM first used nationalist rhetoric to agitate for improvements
 in education. The movement brought to public notice a long list of
 future leaders, including H.O. Davies and Nnamdi Azikiwe. Although
 Azikiwe later came to be recognized as the leading spokesman for
 national unity, his orientation on return from university training in
 the United States was pan-African rather than nationalist, emphasizing
 the common African struggle against European colonialism. He betrayed
 much less consciousness of purely Nigerian goals than Davies, a student
 of Harold Laski at the London School of Economics, whose political
 orientation was considered left-wing.

By 1938 the NYM was agitating for dominion status within the British
 Commonwealth of Nations, so that Nigeria would have the same status as
 Canada and Australia. In elections that year, the NYM ended the
 domination of the NNDP in the Legislative Council and moved to establish
 a genuinely national network of affiliates. This promising start was
 stopped short three years later by internal divisions in which ethnic
 loyalties emerged triumphant. The departure of Azikiwe and other Igbo
 members of the NYM left the organization in Yoruba hands; during World
 War II, it was reorganized into a predominantly Yoruba political party,
 the Action Group, by Awolowo. Yoruba-Igbo rivalry had become a major
 factor in Nigerian politics.

During World War II, three battalions of the Nigeria Regiment fought
 in the Ethiopian campaign. Nigerian units also contributed to two
 divisions serving with British forces in Palestine, Morocco, Sicily, and
 Burma, where they won many honors. Wartime experiences provided a new
 frame of reference for many soldiers, who interacted across ethnic
 boundaries in ways that were unusual in Nigeria. The war also made the
 British reappraise Nigeria's political future. The war years, moreover,
 witnessed a polarization between the older, more parochial leaders
 inclined toward gradualism and the younger intellectuals, who thought in
 more immediate terms.

The rapid growth of organized labor in the 1940s also brought new
 political forces into play. During the war, union membership increased
 sixfold to 30,000. The proliferation of labor organizations, however,
 fragmented the movement, and potential leaders lacked the experience and
 skill to draw workers together.

In the postwar period, party lines were sharply drawn on the basis of
 ethnicity and regionalism. After the demise of the NYM, the nationalist
 movement splintered into the Hausa- and Fulani- backed Northern People's
 Congress (NPC), the Yoruba-supported Action Group, and the
 Igbo-dominated National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC,
 later the National Council of Nigerian Citizens). These parties
 negotiated with the British government over constitutional changes, but
 cooperation among them was the result of expediency rather than an
 emerging sense of national identity. Because of the essentially regional
 political alignments of the parties, the British government decided to
 impose a political solution for Nigeria based on a federally structured
 constitution.

Nigeria's first political party to have nationwide appeal was the
 NCNC, founded in 1944 when Azikiwe encouraged activists in the National
 Youth Movement to call a conference in Lagos of all major Nigerian
 organizations to "weld the heterogeneous masses of Nigeria into one
 solid bloc." The aged Macauley was elected president of the new
 group, and Azikiwe became its secretary general. The party platform
 renewed the National Youth Movement's appeal for Nigerian
 self-government within the Commonwealth under a democratic constitution.

At its inception, party membership was based on affiliated
 organizations that included labor unions, social groups, political
 clubs, professional associations, and more than 100 ethnic
 organizations. These bodies afforded unusual opportunities for political
 education in existing constituencies, but the NYM, which was fading out,
 was absent from the list of NCNC affiliates. Leadership of the NCNC
 rested firmly with Azikiwe, in large part because of his commanding
 personality but also because of the string of newspapers he operated and
 through which he argued the nationalist cause. In the late 1940s, the
 NCNC captured a majority of the votes in the predominantly Yoruba
 Western Region, but increasingly it came to rely on Igbo support,
 supplemented by alliances with minority parties in the Northern Region.
 The NCNC backed the creation of new regions, where minorities would be
 ensured a larger voice, as a step toward the formation of a strong
 unitary national government.

The Action Group arose in 1951 as a response to Igbo control of the
 NCNC and as a vehicle for Yoruba regionalism that resisted the concept
 of unitary government. The party was structured democratically and
 benefited from political spadework done by the NCNC in the Western
 Region in the late 1940s. As a movement designed essentially to exploit
 the federal arrangement to attain regional power, however, the Action
 Group became the NCNC's competitor for votes in the south at the
 national level and at the local level in the Western Region.

The Action Group was largely the creation of Awolowo, general
 secretary of Egbe Omo Oduduwa and leader of the Nigerian Produce
 Traders' Association. The Action Group was thus the heir of a generation
 of flourishing cultural consciousness among the Yoruba and also had
 valuable connections with commercial interests that were representative
 of the comparative economic advancement of the Western Region. Awolowo
 had little difficulty in appealing to broad segments of the Yoruba
 population, but he strove to prevent the Action Group from being
 stigmatized as a "tribal" group. Despite his somewhat
 successful efforts to enlist non-Yoruba support, the regionalist
 sentiment that had stimulated the party initially could hardly be
 concealed.

Another obstacle to the development of the Action Group was the
 animosity between segments of the Yoruba community--for example, many
 people in Ibadan opposed Awolowo on personal grounds because of his
 identification with the Ijebu Yoruba. Despite these difficulties, the
 Action Group rapidly built an effective organization. Its program
 reflected greater planning and was more ideologically oriented than that
 of the NCNC. Although he did not have Azikiwe's compelling personality,
 Awolowo was a formidable debater as well as a vigorous and tenacious
 political campaigner. He used for the first time in Nigeria modern,
 sometimes flamboyant, electioneering techniques. Among his leading
 lieutenants were Samuel Akintola of Ibadan and the oni of Ife.

The Action Group was a consistent supporter of minority-group demands
 for autonomous states within a federal structure, and it even supported
 the severance of a midwest state from the Western Region. This move
 assumed that comparable alterations would be made elsewhere, an attitude
 that won the party minority voting support in the other regions. It also
 backed Yoruba irredentism in the Fulani-ruled emirate of Ilorin in the
 Northern Region and separatist movements among non-Igbo in the Eastern
 Region.

The Northern People's Congress (NPC) was organized in the late 1940s
 by a small group of Western-educated northern Muslims who obtained the
 assent of the emirs to form a political party capable of
 counterbalancing the activities of the southern-based parties. It
 represented a substantial element of reformism in the Muslim north. The
 most powerful figure in the party was Ahmadu Bello, the sardauna
 (war leader) of Sokoto, a controversial figure who aspired to become the
 sultan of Sokoto, still the most important political and religious
 position in the north. Often described by opponents as a
 "feudal" conservative, Bello had a consuming interest in the
 protection of northern social and political institutions from southern
 influence. He also insisted on maintaining the territorial integrity of
 the Northern Region, including those areas with non-Muslim populations.
 He was prepared to introduce educational and economic changes to
 strengthen the north. Although his own ambitions were limited to the
 Northern Region, Bello backed the NPC's successful efforts to mobilize
 the north's large voting strength so as to win control of the national
 government.

The NPC platform emphasized the integrity of the north, its
 traditions, religion, and social order. Support for broad Nigerian
 concerns occupied a clear second place. A lack of interest in extending
 the NPC beyond the Northern Region corresponded to this strictly
 regional orientation. Its activist membership was drawn from local
 government and emirate officials who had access to means of
 communication and to repressive traditional authority that could keep
 the opposition in line.

The small contingent of northerners who had been educated abroad--a
 group that included Abubakar Tafawa Balewa and Aminu Kano--was allied
 with British-backed efforts to introduce gradual change to the emirates.
 The support given by the emirs to limited modernization was motivated
 largely by fear of the unsettling presence of southerners in the north
 and by the equally unsettling example of improving conditions in the
 south. Those northern leaders who were committed to modernization were
 firmly connected to the traditional power structure. Most internal
 problems within the north--peasant disaffection or rivalry among Muslim
 factions--were concealed, and open opposition to the domination of the
 Muslim aristocracy was not tolerated. Critics, including representatives
 of the middle belt who plainly resented Muslim domination, were
 relegated to small, peripheral parties or to inconsequential separatist
 movements.

In 1950 Aminu Kano, who had been instrumental in founding the NPC,
 broke away to form one such party, the Northern Elements Progressive
 Union (NEPU), in protest against the NPC's limited objectives and what
 he regarded as a vain hope that traditional rulers would accept
 modernization. NEPU formed a parliamentary alliance with the NCNC.

The NPC continued to represent the interests of the traditional order
 in the preindependence deliberations. After the defection of Kano, the
 only significant disagreement within the NPC related to the awareness of
 moderates, such as Balewa, that only by overcoming political and
 economic backwardness could the NPC protect the foundations of
 traditional northern authority against the influence of the more
 advanced south.

In all three regions, minority parties represented the special
 interests of ethnic groups, especially as they were affected by the
 majority. The size of their legislative delegations, when successful in
 electing anyone to the regional assemblies, was never large enough to be
 effective, but they served as a means of public expression for minority
 concerns. They received attention from major parties before elections,
 at which time either a dominant party from another region or the
 opposition party in their region sought their alliance.

The political parties jockeyed for positions of power in anticipation
 of the independence of Nigeria. Three constitutions were enacted from
 1946 to 1954 that were subjects of considerable political controversy in
 themselves but inevitably moved the country toward greater internal
 autonomy, with an increasing role for the political parties. The trend
 was toward the establishment of a parliamentary system of government,
 with regional assemblies and a federal House of Representatives.

In 1946 a new constitution was approved by the British Parliament and
 promulgated in Nigeria. Although it reserved effective power in the
 hands of the governor and his appointed executive council, the so-called
 Richards Constitution (after Governor Arthur Richards, who was
 responsible for its formulation) provided for an expanded Legislative
 Council empowered to deliberate on matters affecting the whole country.
 Separate legislative bodies, the houses of assembly, were established in
 each of the three regions to consider local questions and to advise the
 lieutenant governors. The introduction of the federal principle, with
 deliberative authority devolved on the regions, signaled recognition of
 the country's diversity. Although realistic in its assessment of the
 situation in Nigeria, the Richards Constitution undoubtedly intensified
 regionalism as an alternative to political unification.

The pace of constitutional change accelerated after the promulgation
 of the Richards Constitution, which was suspended in 1950. The call for
 greater autonomy resulted in an interparliamentary conference at Ibadan
 in 1950, when the terms of a new constitution were drafted. The
 so-called Macpherson Constitution, after the incumbent governor, went
 into effect the following year.

The most important innovations in the new charter reinforced the dual
 course of constitutional evolution, allowing for both regional autonomy
 and federal union. By extending the elective principle and by providing
 for a central government with a Council of Ministers, the Macpherson
 Constitution gave renewed impetus to party activity and to political
 participation at the national level. But by providing for comparable
 regional governments exercising broad legislative powers, which could
 not be overridden by the newly established 185-seat federal House of
 Representatives, the Macpherson Constitution also gave a significant
 boost to regionalism. Subsequent revisions contained in a new
 constitution the Lyttleton Constitution, enacted in 1954, firmly
 established the federal principle and paved the way for independence.

In 1957 the Western and the Eastern regions became formally
 self-governing under the parliamentary system. Similar status was
 acquired by the Northern Region two years later. There were numerous
 differences of detail among the regional systems, but all adhered to
 parliamentary forms and were equally autonomous in relation to the
 federal government at Lagos. The federal government retained specified
 powers, including responsibility for banking, currency, external
 affairs, defense, shipping and navigation, and communications, but real
 political power was centered in the regions. Significantly, the regional
 governments controlled public expenditures derived from revenues raised
 within each region.

Ethnic cleavages intensified in the 1950s. Political activists in the
 southern areas spoke of self-government in terms of educational
 opportunities and economic development. Because of the spread of mission
 schools and wealth derived from export crops, the southern parties were
 committed to policies that would benefit the south of the country. In
 the north, the emirs intended to maintain firm control on economic and
 political change. Any activity in the north that might include
 participation by the federal government (and consequently by southern
 civil servants) was regarded as a challenge to the primacy of the
 emirates. Broadening political participation and expanding educational
 opportunities and other social services also were viewed as threats to
 the status quo. Already there was an extensive immigrant population of
 southerners, especially Igbo, in the north; they dominated clerical
 positions and were active in many trades.

The cleavage between the Yoruba and the Igbo was accentuated by their
 competition for control of the political machinery. The receding British
 presence enabled, local officials and politicians to gain access to
 patronage over government jobs, funds for local development, market
 permits, trade licenses, government contracts, and even scholarships for
 higher education. In an economy with many qualified applicants for every
 post, great resentment was generated by any favoritism authorities
 showed to members of their own ethnic group.

In the immediate post-World War II period, Nigeria benefited from a
 favorable trade balance. The principal exports were agricultural
 commodities--peanuts and cotton from the Northern Region, palm products
 from the Eastern Region, and cocoa from the Western Region. Marketing
 boards, again regionally based, were established to handle these exports
 and to react to price fluctuations on the world market. During the
 1950s, the marketing boards accumulated considerable surpluses.
 Initially, imports lagged behind exports, although by the mid-1950s
 imports began to catch up with exports, and the surpluses decreased.
 Expansion in the nonagricultural sectors required large imports of
 machinery, transport equipment and, eventually, intermediate materials
 for industry. In time there also were increased administrative costs to
 be met. Although per capita income in the country as a whole remained
 low by international standards, rising incomes among salaried personnel
 and burgeoning urbanization expanded consumer demand for imported goods.

In the meantime, public sector spending increased even more
 dramatically than export earnings. It was supported not only by the
 income from huge agricultural surpluses but also by a new range of
 direct and indirect taxes imposed during the 1950s. The transfer of
 responsibility for budgetary management from the central to the regional
 governments in 1954 accelerated the pace of public spending on services
 and on development projects. Total revenues of central and regional
 governments nearly doubled in relation to the gross domestic product (GDP) during the decade.

The most dramatic event, having a long-term effect on Nigeria's
 economic development, was the discovery and exploitation of petroleum
 deposits. The search for oil, begun in 1908 and abandoned a few years
 later, was revived in 1937 by Shell and British Petroleum. Exploration
 was intensified in 1946, but the first commercial discovery did not
 occur until 1956, at Olobiri in the Niger Delta. In 1958 exportation of
 Nigerian oil was initiated at facilities constructed at Port Harcourt.
 Oil income was still marginal, but the prospects for continued economic
 expansion appeared bright and further accentuated political rivalries on
 the eve of independence.

The election of the House of Representatives after the adoption of
 the 1954 constitution gave the NPC a total of seventy-nine seats, all
 from the Northern Region. Among the other major parties, the NCNC took
 fifty-six seats, winning a majority in both the Eastern and the Western
 regions, while the Action Group captured only twenty-seven seats. The
 NPC was called on to form a government, but the NCNC received six of the
 ten ministerial posts. Three of these posts were assigned to
 representatives from each region, and one was reserved for a delegate
 from the Northern Cameroons.

As a further step toward independence, the governor's Executive
 Council was merged with the Council of Ministers in 1957 to form the
 all-Nigerian Federal Executive Council. NPC federal parliamentary leader
 Balewa was appointed prime minister. Balewa formed a coalition
 government that included the Action Group as well as the NCNC to prepare
 the country for the final British withdrawal. His government guided the
 country for the next three years, operating with almost complete
 autonomy in internal affairs.

The preparation of a new federal constitution for an independent
 Nigeria was carried out at conferences held at Lancaster House in London
 in 1957 and 1958 and presided over by the British colonial secretary.
 Nigerian delegates were selected to represent each region and to reflect
 various shades of opinion. The delegation was led by Balewa of the NPC
 and included party leaders Awolowo of the Action Group, Azikiwe of the
 NCNC, and Bello of the NPC; they were also the premiers of the Western,
 Eastern, and Northern regions, respectively. Independence was achieved
 on October 1, 1960.

Elections were held for a new and greatly enlarged House of
 Representatives in December 1959; 174 of the 312 seats were allocated to
 the Northern Region on the basis of its larger population. The NPC,
 entering candidates only in the Northern Region, confined campaigning
 largely to local issues but opposed the addition of new regimes. The
 NCNC backed creation of a midwest state and proposed federal control of
 education and health services. The Action Group, which staged a lively
 campaign, favored stronger government and the establishment of three new
 states, while advocating creation of a West Africa Federation that would
 unite Nigeria with Ghana and Sierra Leone. The NPC captured 142 seats in
 the new legislature. Balewa was called on to head a NPC-NCNC coalition
 government, and Awolowo became official leader of the opposition.