Lugard's immediate successor, Hugh Clifford (1919-25), was an
 aristocratic professional administrator with liberal instincts who had
 won recognition for his enlightened governorship of the Gold Coast. The
 approaches of the two governors to colonial development were
 diametrically opposed. In contrast to Lugard, Clifford argued that it
 was the primary responsibility of colonial government to introduce as
 quickly as practical the benefits of Western experience. He was aware
 that the Muslim north would present problems, but he evinced great hopes
 for progress along the lines that he laid down in the south, where he
 anticipated "general emancipation" leading to a more
 representative form of government. Clifford emphasized economic
 development, encouraging enterprises by immigrant southerners in the
 north while restricting European participation to capitalintensive
 activity.

Uneasy with the amount of latitude allowed traditional leaders under
 indirect rule, Clifford opposed further extension of the judicial
 authority held by the northern emirs, stating bluntly that he did
 "not consider that their past traditions and their present backward
 cultural conditions afford to any such experiment a reasonable chance of
 success." He did not apply this rationale in the south, however,
 where he saw the possibility of building an elite educated in schools
 modeled on a European method. These schools would teach "the basic
 principles that would and should regulate character and conduct."
 In line with this attitude, he rejected Lugard's proposal for moving the
 capital from Lagos, the stronghold of the elite in whom he placed so
 much confidence for the future.

Clifford also believed that indirect rule encouraged centripetal
 tendencies, and he argued that the division into two separate colonies
 was advisable unless a stronger central government could bind Nigeria
 into more than just an administrative convenience for the three regions.
 Whereas Lugard had applied lessons learned in the north to the
 administration of the south, Clifford was prepared to extend to the
 north practices that had been successful in the south. The Colonial
 Office, where Lugard was still held in high regard, accepted that
 changes might be due in the south, but it forbade fundamental alteration
 of procedures in the north. A.J. Harding, director of Nigerian affairs
 at the Colonial Office, defined the official position of the British
 government in its continued support of indirect rule when he commented
 that "direct government by impartial and honest men of alien race .
 . . never yet satisfied a nation long and . . . under such a form of
 government, as wealth and education increase, so do political discontent
 and sedition."

Clifford's recommendations, as modified by the Colonial Office, were
 embodied in the 1922 constitution (known as the Clifford Constitution).
 While administration in the north was left untouched, a new legislative
 council was established in common for the two southern regions,
 replacing the Lagos Legislative Council and the moribund Nigerian
 Council. For the first time, direct elections took place outside Lagos,
 although only four of the council's forty-six members were elected.
 Moreover, the introduction of the legislative principle encouraged the
 emergence of political parties and ultimately the growth of nationalism
 in Nigeria. By 1931 strong sentiments had emerged in the north in
 reaction to Clifford's reforms.