The first elections under the 1979 constitution were held on schedule
 in July and August 1979, and the FMG handed over power to a new civilian
 government under President Shehu Shagari on October 1, 1979. Nigeria's
 Second Republic was born amid great expectations. Oil prices were high
 and revenues were on the increase. It appeared that unlimited
 development was possible. Unfortunately, the euphoria was short-lived,
 and the Second Republic did not survive its infancy.

Five major parties competed for power in the first elections in 1979.
 As might be expected, there was some continuity between the old parties
 of the First Republic and the new parties of the Second Republic. The
 National Party of Nigeria (NPN), for example, inherited the mantle of
 the Northern People's Congress, although the NPN differed from the NPC
 in that it obtained significant support in the non-Igbo states of
 southeastern Nigeria. The United Party of Nigeria (UPN) was the
 successor to the Action Group, with Awolowo as its head. Its support was
 almost entirely in the Yoruba states. The Nigerian People's Party (NPP),
 the successor to the NCNC, was predominantly Igbo and had Azikiwe as its
 leader. An attempt to forge an alliance with nonHausa -Fulani northern
 elements collapsed in the end, and a breakaway party with strong support
 in parts of the north emerged from the failed alliance. This northern
 party was known as the Great Nigerian People's Party under the
 leadership of Waziri Ibrahim of Borno. Finally, the People's Redemption
 Party was the successor to the Northern Elements Progressive Union and
 had Aminu Kano as its head.

Just as the NPC dominated the First Republic, its successor, the NPN,
 dominated the Second Republic. Shagari won the presidency, defeating
 Azikiwe in a close and controversial vote. The NPN also took 36 of 95
 Senate seats, 165 of 443 House of Representatives seats and won control
 of seven states (Sokoto, Niger, Bauchi, Benue, Cross River, Kwara, and
 Rivers). The NPN lost the governorship of Kaduna State but secured
 control of the Kaduna legislature. The NPN failed to take Kano and
 lacked a majority in either the Senate or House of Representatives. It
 was forced to form a shaky coalition with the NPP, the successor of the
 NCNC, the old coalition partner of the NPC. The NPP took three states
 (Anambra, Imo, and Plateau), sixteen Senate seats and seventy-eight
 House of Representatives seats, so that in combination with the NPN the
 coalition had a majority in both the House of Representatives and the
 Senate. Nonetheless, the interests of the two parties were often in
 conflict, which forced the NPN to operate alone in most situations. Even
 though the presidential form of constitution was intended to create a
 stronger central government, the weakness of the coalition undermined
 effective central authority.

The UPN came in with the second largest number of seats and
 effectively formed the official opposition, just as the Action Group had
 done in the First Republic. The UPN took five states (Lagos, Oyo, Ogun,
 Ondo, and Bendel), 28 Senate seats, and 111 House seats. Awolowo
 continued as spokesman for the left of center. The Great Nigerian
 People's Party managed to win two states (Borno and Gongola), eight
 Senate seats, and forty-three House of Representatives seats. The
 People's Redemption Party, which was the most radical of the parties,
 won Kano and the governorship of Kaduna, seven Senate seats, and
 forty-nine House of Representatives seats.

A number of weaknesses beset the Second Republic. First, the
 coalition that dominated federal politics was not strong, and in effect
 the NPN governed as a minority because no coalition formed to challenge
 its supremacy. Second, there was lack of cooperation between the
 NPN-dominated federal government and the twelve states controlled by
 opposition parties. Third, and perhaps most important, the oil boom
 ended in mid-1981, precisely when expectations of continuous growth and
 prosperity were at a height.

There were many signs of tension in the country. The Bakalori
 Project, an irrigation scheme in Sokoto, for example, became the focus
 of serious unrest in the late 1970s when thousands of farmers protested
 the loss of their land, and police retaliated by burning villages and
 killing or wounding hundreds of people. Widespread dissatisfaction
 became apparent with the Maitatsine, or Yan Tatsine (followers of the
 Maitatsine), a quasi-Muslim fringe group that who sparked religious
 riots in Kano in 1980, and Kaduna, and Maiduguri in 1982 after police
 tried to control this activities. The disturbance in Kano alone resulted
 in the deaths of 4,177 people between December 18 and 29, 1980. In 1981
 teachers staged a strike because they had not been paid. As the
 political situation deteriorated, the federal government looked for
 scapegoats and found them in the large number of foreign workers who had
 come to Nigeria in response to the jobs created by the oil boom. In the
 crackdown on illegal immigration, an estimated 2 million foreigners were
 expelled in January and February 1983, of whom 1 million were from Ghana
 and 150,000 to 200,000 from Niger.

The recession that set in with the fall in oil prices after the
 middle of 1981 put severe strains on the Second Republic. For political
 reasons, government spending continued to accelerate, and the frictions
 among the political parties and between the federal government and the
 states only reinforced financial irresponsibility. Nigeria's foreign
 debt increased from N3.3 billion in 1978 to N14.7 billion in 1982. By
 1983 the nineteen state governments had run up a combined debt of N13.3
 billion. Heavy investment in economic development continued unabated. In
 addition to finishing a steel mill at Ajaokuta in Kwara State, for
 example, a second plant opened at Aladje, near Warri, in 1982.
 Steel-rolling mills also were built at Jos, Oshogbo, and Katsina--sites
 chosen for political reasons. By 1987 N5 billion had been spent on the
 steel industry alone, most of this committed under the Second Republic,
 even although the economics of steel development were questionable.

Corruption once again was rampant under the Second Republic. It had
 been a serious problem since the civil war, when wartime contracts often
 were awarded under dubious circumstances. Corruption became more serious
 after the war, most notably in connection with the cement scandal of the
 early 1970s, the Festival of African Culture (FESTAC) in Lagos, and the
 development of Abuja as the new federal capital. Corruption under the
 Second Republic was even greater. Major scandals involved the Federal
 Housing Scheme, the National Youth Service Corps, the Nigerian External
 Telecommunications, the Federal Mortgage Bank, the Federal Capital
 Territory Administration, the Central Bank of Nigeria, and the Nigerian
 National Supply Company. In addition, the halfhearted attempts to
 license imports and to control inflation encouraged smuggling, which
 became a major crime that went virtually unchecked. Umaru Dikko came to
 the attention of the international community because of an abortive plot
 to kidnap him in London and return him to Nigeria to stand trial for
 corruption. British authorities found him in a shipping crate on a
 runway moments before he was to be sent to Nigeria. Dikko was involved
 in many scandals, including the issuance of licenses to import
 rice--rice imports had risen from 50,000 tons in 1976 to 651,000 tons in
 1982.

As elections approached in August 1983, economic decline that
 reflected low oil prices, widespread corruption, and continued
 government spending at record levels was proof to many that the Second
 Republic was in sad shape. The lack of confidence was evident in the
 massive flight of capital--estimated at US$14 billion between 1979 and
 1983. The second elections under the Second Republic were to be its
 last. When the results were tallied in 1983, it was clear that there had
 been fraud. The NPN increased its control of states from seven to
 twelve, including Kano and Kaduna. Shagari was reelected president, and
 the NPN gained 61 of 95 Senate seats and 307 of 450 House of
 Representatives seats. Not even the supporters of the NPN expected such
 results. Considering the state of the economy and the public outcry over
 the rigged election, the Shagari government stayed in power for a
 surgprisingly long time.