Throughout the remainder of 1966 and into 1967, the FMG sought to
 convene a constituent assembly for revision of the constitution that
 might enable an early return to civilian rule. Nonetheless, the tempo of
 violence increased. In September attacks on Igbo in the north were
 renewed with unprecedented ferocity, stirred up by Muslim
 traditionalists with the connivance, Eastern Region leaders believed, of
 northern political leaders. The army was sharply divided along regional
 lines. Reports circulated that troops from the Northern Region had
 participated in the mayhem. The estimated number of deaths ranged as
 high as 30,000, although the figure was probably closer to 8,000 to
 10,000. More than 1 million Igbo returned to the Eastern Region. In
 retaliation, some northerners were massacred in Port Harcourt and other
 eastern cities, and a counterexodus of non-Igbo was under way.

The Eastern Region's military governor, Lieutenant Colonel
 Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu, was under pressure from Igbo officers to
 assert greater independence from the FMG. Indeed, the eastern military
 government refused to recognize Gowon's legitimacy on the ground that he
 was not the most senior officer in the chain of command. Some of
 Ojukwu's colleagues questioned whether the country could be reunited
 amicably after the outrages committed against the Igbo in the Northern
 Region. Ironically, many responsible easterners who had advocated a
 unitary state now called for looser ties with the other regions.

The military commanders and governors, including Ojukwu, met in Lagos
 to consider solutions to the regional strife. But they failed to reach a
 settlement, despite concessions offered by the northerners, because it
 proved impossible to guarantee the security of Igbo outside the Eastern
 Region. The military conferees reached a consensus only in the contempt
 they expressed for civilian politicians. Fearing for his safety, Ojukwu
 refused invitations to attend subsequent meetings in Lagos.

In January 1967, the military leaders and senior police officials met
 at Aburi, Ghana, at the invitation of the Ghanaian military government.
 By now the Eastern Region was threatening secession. In a last-minute
 effort to hold Nigeria together, the military reached an accord that
 provided for a loose confederation of regions. The federal civil service
 vigorously opposed the Aburi Agreement, however. Awolowo, regrouping his
 supporters, demanded the removal of all northern troops garrisoned in
 the Western Region and warned that if the Eastern Region left the
 federation, the Western Region would follow. The FMG agreed to the troop
 withdrawal.

In May Gowon issued a decree implementing the Aburi Agreement. Even
 the Northern Region leaders, who had been the first to threaten
 secession, now favored the formation of a multistate federation.
 Meanwhile, the military governor of the Midwestern Region announced that
 his region must be considered neutral in the event of civil war.

The Ojukwu government rejected the plan for reconciliation and made
 known its intention to retain all revenues collected in the Eastern
 Region in reparation for the cost of resettling Igbo refugees. The
 eastern leaders had reached the point of ruptive in their relations with
 Lagos and the rest of Nigeria. Despite offers made by the FMG that met
 many of Ojukwu's demands, the Eastern Region Consultative Assembly voted
 May 26 to secede from Nigeria. In Lagos Gowon proclaimed a state of
 emergency and unveiled plans for abolition of the regions and for
 redivision of the country into twelve states. This provision broke up
 the Northern Region, undermining the possibility of continued northern
 domination and offering a major concession to the Eastern Region. It was
 also a strategic move, which won over eastern minorities and deprived
 the rebellious Igbo heartland of its control over the oil fields and
 access to the sea. Gowon also appointed prominent civilians, including
 Awolowo, as commissioners in the federal and new state governments, thus
 broadening his political support.

On May 30, Ojukwu answered the federal decree with the proclamation
 of the independent Republic of Biafra, named after the Bight of Biafra.
 He cited as the principal cause for this action the Nigerian
 government's inability to protect the lives of easterners and suggested
 its culpability in genocide, depicting secession as a measure taken
 reluctantly after all efforts to safeguard the Igbo people in other
 regions had failed.

Initially the FMG launched "police measures" to restore the
 authority of Lagos in the Eastern Region. Army units attempted to
 advance into secessionist territory in July, but rebel troops easily
 stopped them. The Biafrans retaliated with a surprise thrust into the
 Midwestern Region, where they seized strategic points. However,
 effective control of the delta region remained under federal control
 despite several rebel attempts to take the non-Igbo area. The federal
 government began to mobilize large numbers of recruits to supplement its
 10,000-member army.

By the end of 1967, federal forces had regained the Midwestern Region
 and secured the delta region, which was reorganized as the Rivers State
 and Southeastern State, cutting off Biafra from direct access to the
 sea. But a proposed invasion of the rebel-held territory, now confined
 to the Igbo heartland, stalled along the stiffened Biafran defense
 perimeter.

A stalemate developed as federal attacks on key towns broke down in
 the face of stubborn Biafran resistance. Ill-armed and trained under
 fire, rebel troops nonetheless had the benefit of superior leadership
 and superb morale. Although vastly outnumbered and outgunned, the
 Biafrans probed weak points in the federal lines, making lightning
 tactical gains, cutting off and encircling advancing columns, and
 launching commando raids behind federal lines. Biafran strikes across
 the Niger managed to pin down large concentrations of federal troops on
 the west bank.

In September 1968, Owerri was captured by federal troops advancing
 from the south, and early in 1969 the federal army, expanded to nearly
 250,000 men, opened three fronts in what Gowon touted as the "final
 offensive." Although federal forces flanked the rebels by crossing
 the Niger at Onitsha, they failed to break through. The Biafrans
 subsequently retook Owerri in fierce fighting and threatened to push on
 to Port Harcourt until thwarted by a renewed federal offensive in the
 south. That offensive tightened the noose around the rebel enclave
 without choking it into submission.

Biafran propaganda, which stressed the threat of genocide to the Igbo
 people, was extremely effective abroad in winning sympathy for the
 secessionist movement. Food and medical supplies were scarce in Biafra.
 Humanitarian aid, as well as arms and munitions, reached the embattled
 region from international relief organizations and from private and
 religious groups in the United States and Western Europe by way of
 nighttime airlifts over the war zone. The bulk of Biafra's military
 supplies was purchased on the international arms market with unofficial
 assistance provided by France through former West African colonies. In
 one of the most dramatic episodes of the civil war, Carl Gustav von
 Rosen, a Swedish count who at one time commanded the Ethiopian air
 force, and several other Swedish pilots flew five jet trainers modified
 for combat in successful strikes against Nigerian military
 installations.

Biafra's independence was recognized by Tanzania, Zambia, Gabon, and
 the Ivory Coast, but it was compromised in the eyes of most African
 states by the approval of South Africa, Southern Rhodesia, and Portugal.
 Britain extended diplomatic support and limited military assistance to
 the federal government. The Soviet Union became an important source of
 military equipment for Nigeria. Modern Soviet-built warplanes, flown by
 Egyptian and British pilots, interdicted supply flights and inflicted
 heavy casualties during raids on Biafran urban centers. In line with its
 policy of noninvolvement, the United States prohibited the sale of
 military goods to either side while continuing to recognize the FMG.

In October 1969, Ojukwu appealed for United Nations (UN) mediation
 for a cease-fire as a prelude to peace negotiations. But the federal
 government insisted on Biafra's surrender, and Gowon observed that
 "rebel leaders had made it clear that this is a fight to the finish
 and that no concession will ever satisfy them." In December federal
 forces opened a four-pronged offensive, involving 120,000 troops, that
 sliced Biafra in half. When Owerri fell on January 6, 1970, Biafran
 resistance collapsed. Ojukwu fled to the Ivory Coast, leaving his chief
 of staff, Philip Effiong, behind as "officer administering the
 government." Effiong called for an immediate, unconditional
 cease-fire January 12 and submitted to the authority of the federal
 government at ceremonies in Lagos.

Estimates in the former Eastern Region of the number of dead from
 hostilities, disease, and starvation during the thirty-month civil war
 are estimated at between 1 million and 3 million. The end of the
 fighting found more than 3 million Igbo refugees crowded into a
 2,500-square-kilometer enclave. Prospects for the survival of many of
 them and for the future of the region were dim. There were severe
 shortages of food, medicine, clothing, and housing. The economy of the
 region was shattered. Cities were in ruins; schools, hospitals,
 utilities, and transportation facilities were destroyed or inoperative.
 Overseas groups instituted a major relief effort, but the FMG insisted
 on directing all assistance and recovery operations and barred some
 agencies that had supplied aid to Biafra.

Because charges of genocide had fueled international sympathy for
 Biafra, the FMG allowed a team of international experts to observe the
 surrender and to look for evidence. Subsequently, the observers
 testified that they found no evidence of genocide or systematic
 destruction of property, although there was considerable evidence of
 famine and death as a result of the war. Furthermore, under Gowon's
 close supervision, the federal government ensured that Igbo civilians
 would not be treated as defeated enemies. A program was launched to
 reintegrate the Biafran rebels into a unified Nigeria. A number of
 public officials who had "actively counselled, aided, or
 abetted" secession were dismissed, but a clear distinction was made
 between them and those who had simply carried out their duties. Igbo
 personnel soon were being reenlisted in the federal armed forces. There
 were no trials and few people were imprisoned. Ojukwu, in exile, was
 made the scapegoat, but efforts to have him extradited failed.

An Igbo official, Ukapi "Tony" Asika, was named
 administrator of the new East Central State, comprising the Igbo
 heartland. Asika had remained loyal to the federal government during the
 civil war, but as a further act of conciliation, his all-Igbo cabinet
 included members who had served under the secessionist regime. Asika was
 unpopular with many Igbo, who considered him a traitor, and his
 administration was characterized as inept and corrupt. In three years
 under his direction, however, the state government achieved the
 rehabilitation of 70 percent of the industry incapacitated during the
 war. The federal government granted funds to cover the state's operating
 expenses for an interim period, and much of the war damage was repaired.
 Social services and public utilities slowly were reinstituted, although
 not to the prewar levels.