All evidence suggests the early settlement of Nigeria millennia
 before the spread of agriculture 3,000 years ago, and one day it
 probably will be possible to reconstruct the high points of this early
 history. Although archaeological research has made great strides in
 identifying some major developments, comparatively little archaeological
 work has been undertaken. Consequently, it is possible only to outline
 some of the early history of Nigeria.

The earliest known example of a fossil skeleton with negroid
 features, perhaps 10,000 years old, was found at Iii Ileru in western
 Nigeria and attests to the antiquity of habitation in the region. Stone
 tools, indicating human settlement, date back another 2,000 years.
 Microlithic and ceramic industries were developed by pastoralists in the
 savanna from at least the fourth millennium B.C. and were continued by
 grain farmers in the stable agricultural communities that subsequently
 evolved there. To the south, hunting and gathering gradually gave way to
 subsistence farming on the fringe of the forest in the first millennium
 B.C. The cultivation of staple foods, such as yams, later was introduced
 into forest clearings. The stone ax heads, imported in great quantities
 from the north and used in opening the forest for agricultural
 development, were venerated by the Yoruba descendants of neolithic
 pioneers as "thunderbolts" hurled to earth by the gods.

The primitive iron-smelting furnaces at Taruga dating from the fourth
 century B.C. provide the oldest evidence of metalworking in West Africa,
 while excavations for the Kainji Dam revealed the presence of
 ironworking there by the second century B.C. The transition from
 Neolithic times to the Iron Age apparently was achieved without
 intermediate bronze production. Some scholars speculate that knowledge
 of the smelting process may have been transmitted from the Mediterranean
 by Berbers who ventured south. Others suggest that the technology moved
 westward across the Sudan from the Nile Valley, although the arrival of the Iron
 Age in the Niger River valley and the forest region appears to have
 predated the introduction of metallurgy in the upper savanna by more
 than 800 years. The usefulness of iron tools was demonstrated in the
 south for bush cutting and in the north for well digging and the
 construction of irrigation works, contributing in both regions to the
 expansion of agriculture.

The earliest culture in Nigeria to be identified by its distinctive
 artifacts is that of the Nok people. These skilled artisans and
 ironworkers were associated with Taruga and flourished between the
 fourth century B.C. and the second century A.D. in a large area above
 the confluence of the Niger and Benue rivers on the Jos Plateau. The Nok
 achieved a level of material development not repeated in the region for
 nearly 1,000 years. Their terra-cotta sculpture, abstractly stylized and
 geometric in conception, is admired both for its artistic expression and
 for the high technical standards of its production.

Information is lacking from the "silent millennium" (first
 millennium A.D.) that followed the Nok ascendancy, apart from evidence
 of iron smelting on Dala Hill in Kano from about 600 to 700 A.D. It is
 assumed, however, that trade linking the Niger region with North Africa
 played a key role in the continuing development of the area. Certainly
 by the beginning of the second millennium A.D., there was an active
 trade along a north-south axis from North Africa through the Sahara to
 the forest, with the savanna people acting as intermediaries in
 exchanges that involved slaves, ivory, salt, glass beads, coral, cloth,
 weapons, brass rods, and other goods.