Frederick Lugard, who assumed the position of high commissioner of
 the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria in 1900, often has been regarded as
 the model British colonial administrator. Trained as an army officer, he
 had served in India, Egypt, and East Africa, where he expelled Arab
 slave traders from Nyasaland and established the British presence in
 Uganda. Joining the Royal Niger Company in 1894, Lugard was sent to
 Borgu to counter inroads made by the French, and in 1897 he was made
 responsible for raising the Royal West African Frontier Force (RWAFF)
 from local levies to serve under British officers.

During his six-year tenure as high commissioner, Lugard was occupied
 with transforming the commercial sphere of influence inherited from the
 Royal Niger Company into a viable territorial unit under effective
 British political control. His objective was to conquer the entire
 region and to obtain recognition of the British protectorate by its
 indigenous rulers, especially the Fulani emirs of the Sokoto Caliphate.
 Lugard's campaign systematically subdued local resistance, using armed
 force when diplomatic measures failed. Borno capitulated without a
 fight, but in 1903 Lugard's RWAFF mounted assaults on Kano and Sokoto.
 From Lugard's point of view, clear-cut military victories were necessary
 because their surrenders weakened resistance elsewhere.

Lugard's success in northern Nigeria has been attributed to his
 policy of indirect rule, which called for governing the protectorate
 through the rulers who had been defeated. If the emirs accepted British
 authority, abandoned the slave trade, and cooperated with British
 officials in modernizing their administrations, the colonial power was
 willing to confirm them in office. The emirs retained their caliphate
 titles but were responsible to British district officers, who had final
 authority. The British high commissiones could depose emirs and other
 officials if necessary. Lugard reduced sharply the number of titled fief
 holders in the emirates, weakening the rulers' patronage. Under indirect
 rule, caliphate officials were transformed into salaried district heads
 and became, in effect, agents of the British authorities, responsible
 for peacekeeping and tax collection. The old chain of command merely was
 capped with a new overlord, the British high commissiones.

The protectorate required only a limited number of colonial officers
 scattered throughout the territory as overseers. Depending on local
 conditions, they exercised discretion in advising the emirs and local
 officials, but all orders from the high commissiones were transmitted
 through the emir. Although the high commissiones possessed unlimited
 executive and legislative powers in the protectorate, most of the
 activities of government were undertaken by the emirs and their local
 administrations, subject to British approval. A dual system of law
 functioned--the sharia (Islamic law) court continued to deal with
 matters affecting the personal status of Muslims, including land
 disputes, divorce, debt, and slave emancipation. As a consequence of
 indirect rule, Hausa-Fulani domination was confirmed--and in some
 instances imposed--on diverse ethnic groups, some of them non-Muslim, in
 the so-called middle belt.

The accomplishments of Lugard and his successors in economic
 development were limited by the revenues available to the colonial
 government. One of Lugard's initial acts was to separate the general
 treasury of each emirate from the emir's privy purse. From taxes
 collected by local officials, first one-quarter and later one-half was
 taken to support services of the colonial regime, which were meager
 because of the protectorate's lack of public resources. In the south,
 missionaries made up for the lack of government expenditure on services;
 in the north, Lugard and his successors limited the activities of
 missionaries in order to maintain Muslim domination. Consequently,
 educational and medical services in the north lagged behind those in the
 south. Progress was made in economic development, however, as railroad
 lines were constructed to transport tin from Jos Plateau and
 northern-grown peanuts and cotton to ports on the coast.

Efforts to apply indirect rule to the south, which was formally a
 protectorate from 1906, in emulation of Lugard's successful policy in
 the north set off a search for legitimate indigenous authorities through
 whom the policy could be implemented. The task proved relatively easy in
 Yorubaland, where the governments and boundaries of traditional kingdoms
 were retained or, in some instances, revived. In the southeast, where
 Aro hegemony had been crushed, the search for acceptable local
 administrators met with frustration. As a result, the tasks of
 government initially were left in the hands of colonial officials, who
 antagonized many Igbo. The Igbo therefore stressed traditional
 egalitarian principles as a justification for their early opposition to
 colonial rule; in Yorubaland and in the north, the devolution of
 administrative duties to the indigenous ruling elites contained much of
 the early opposition. Resistance to colonial rule was mitigated to the
 extent that local authorities and courts were able to manage affairs.

The British prohibited the enslavement of free persons and suppressed
 slave trading. All children in the north who were born to persons in
 bondage on or after April 1, 1900, were declared free. The relations
 between existing slaves and their owners, however, were allowed to
 continue indefinitely, on the assumption that wholesale liberation would
 cause more harm than good by disrupting the agricultural economy. As a
 consequence, at least several hundred thousand slaves deserted their
 masters in the early years of colonial rule. In 1906 a radical,
 allegedly Mahdist, Muslim uprising that received the support of many
 fugitive slaves was brutally crushed. In the south, slaves legally could
 be forced to return to their owners until 1914. In the north, vagrancy
 laws and the enforcement of proprietary rights to land were used to tax
 to check the flight of slaves. Slaves in the northern emirates could
 secure their freedom upon application to an Islamic court, but
 comparatively few used this option. Throughout the colonial period in
 the Muslim north, many slaves and their descendants continued to work
 for their masters or former masters and often received periodic payments
 leading to emancipation.