By the late eighteenth century, many Muslim scholars and teachers had
 become disenchanted with the insecurity that characterized the Hausa
 states and Borno. Some clerics (mallams) continued to reside at
 the courts of the Hausa states and Borno, but others, who joined the
 Qadiriyah brotherhood, began to think about a revolution that would
 overthrow existing authorities. Prominent among these radical mallams
 was Usman dan Fodio, who with his brother and son, attracted a following
 among the clerical class. Many of his supporters were Fulani, and
 because of his ethnicity he was able to appeal to all Fulani,
 particularly the clan leaders and wealthy cattle owners whose clients
 and dependents provided most of the troops in the jihad that began in
 Gobir in 1804. Not all mallams were Fulani, however. The cleric
 whose actions actually started the jihad, Abd as Salam, was Hausa;
 Jibril, one of Usman dan Fodio's teachers and the first cleric to issue
 a call for jihad two decades earlier, was Tuareg. Nonetheless, by the
 time the Hausa states were overthrown in 1808, the prominent leaders
 were all Fulani.

Simultaneous uprisings confirmed the existence of a vast underground
 of Muslim revolutionaries throughout the Hausa states and Borno. By 1808
 the Hausa states had been conquered, although the ruling dynasties
 retreated to the frontiers and built walled cities that remained
 independent. The more important of these independent cities included
 Abuja, where the ousted Zaria Dynasty fled; Argungu in the north, the
 new home of the Kebbi rulers; and Maradi in present-day Niger, the
 retreat of the Katsina Dynasty. Although the Borno mai was
 overthrown and Birni Gazargamu destroyed, Borno did not succumb. The
 reason, primarily, was that another cleric, Al Kanemi, fashioned a
 strong resistance that eventually forced those Fulani in Borno to
 retreat west and south. In the end, Al Kanemi overthrew the
 centuries-old Sayfawa Dynasty of Borno and established his own lineage
 as the new ruling house.

The new state that arose during Usman dan Fodio's jihad came to be
 known as the Sokoto Caliphate, named after his capital at Sokoto,
 founded in 1809. The caliphate was a loose confederation of emirates
 that recognized the suzerainty of the commander of the faithful, the
 sultan. When Usman dan Fodio died in 1817, he was succeeded by his son,
 Muhammad Bello. A dispute between Bello and his uncle, Abdullahi,
 resulted in a nominal division of the caliphate into eastern and western
 divisions, although the supreme authority of Bello as caliph was upheld.
 The division was institutionalized through the creation of a twin
 capital at Gwandu, which was responsible for the western emirates as far
 as modern Burkina Faso--formerly Upper Volta--and initially as far west
 as Massina in modern Mali. As events turned out, the eastern emirates
 were more numerous and larger than the western ones, which reinforced
 the primacy of the caliph at Sokoto.

By the middle of the nineteenth century, there were thirty emirates
 and the capital district of Sokoto, which itself was a large and
 populous territory although not technically an emirate. All the
 important Hausa emirates, including Kano, the wealthiest and most
 populous, were directly under Sokoto. Adamawa, which was established by
 Fulani forced to evacuate Borno, was geographically the biggest,
 stretching far to the south and east of its capital at Yola into modern
 Cameroon. Ilorin, which became part of the caliphate in the 1830s, was
 initially the headquarters of the Oyo cavalry that had provided the
 backbone of the king's power. An attempted coup d'état by the general
 of the cavalry in 1817 backfired when the cavalry itself revolted and
 pledged its allegiance to the Sokoto Caliphate. The cavalry was largely
 composed of Muslim slaves from farther north, and they saw in the jihad
 a justification for rebellion. In the 1820s, Oyo had been torn asunder,
 and the defeated king and the warlords of the Oyo Mesi retreated south
 to form new cities, including Ibadan, where they carried on their
 resistance to the caliphate and fought among themselves as well.

Usman dan Fodio's jihad created the largest empire in Africa since
 the fall of Songhai in 1591. By the middle of the nineteenth century,
 when the Sokoto Caliphate was at its greatest extent, it stretched 1,500
 kilometers from Dori in modern Burkina Faso to southern Adamawa in
 Cameroon and included Nupe lands, Ilorin in northern Yorubaland, and
 much of the Benue River valley. In addition, Usman dan Fodio's jihad
 provided the inspiration for a series of related holy wars in other
 parts of the savanna and Sahel far beyond Nigeria's borders that led to
 the foundation of Islamic states in Senegal, Mali, Ivory Coast, Chad,
 Central African Republic, and Sudan. An analogy has been drawn between
 Usman dan Fodio's jihad and the French Revolution in terms of its
 widespread impact. Just as the French Revolution affected the course of
 European history in the nineteenth century, the Sokoto jihad affected
 the course of history throughout the savanna from Senegal to the Red
 Sea.