After independence the attitudes of the major parties toward the
 formation of new states that could accommodate minority aspirations
 varied widely. The NCNC espoused self-determination for ethnic
 minorities but only in accordance with its advocacy of a unitary state.
 The Action Group also supported such movements, including the
 restoration of the northern Yoruba area (Ilorin) to the Western Region,
 but as part of a multistate, federal Nigeria. The NPC steadfastly
 opposed separatism in the Northern Region and attempted with some
 success to win over disaffected minorities in the middle belt.

Proposals were introduced for the creation of three states as a means
 of restructuring the regions along ethnic lines. The most extensive
 revision sought the separation of the middle belt from the Northern
 Region, a move the United Middle Belt Congress promoted. Serious riots
 in Tivland in 1960 and 1964 were related to this agitation. Another plan
 was put forward by the Edo and western Igbo to create the Midwestern
 Region by separating the whole tract adjacent to the Niger River from
 the Yoruba-dominated Western Region. At the same time, Ijaw and
 Efik-Ibibio ethnic groups proposed that the coast between the Niger
 Delta and Calabar become a new region in order to end Igbo dominance in
 that area. At this time, however, only the Midwestern Region achieved
 formal approval, despite opposition of the Action Group. The creation of
 the region was confirmed by plebiscite in 1963.

The creation of the Midwestern Region reopened the question of the
 internal restructuring of Nigeria. One motive for a more drastic
 restructuring was the desire to break up the Northern Region. That
 region, having more than half the country's population, controlled a
 majority of the seats in the House of Representatives. There was also
 the fear that the Igbo-dominated NCNC would gain control of the
 Midwestern legislature and thereby become even more powerful. A new
 political coalition, the Midwest Democratic Front (MDF), was formed by
 leaders of the Action Group and the United People's Party to contest the
 Midwestern Region election with the NCNC. During the campaign, the
 conservative United People's Party accepted support from the NPC, a fact
 that NCNC candidates stressed in their call to keep northern influence
 out of the region. Many Action Group workers withdrew support from the
 MDF in protest, and some allied themselves with the NCNC. In the 1964
 elections, the NCNC won by a landslide.

New State Movements

After independence the attitudes of the major parties toward the
 formation of new states that could accommodate minority aspirations
 varied widely. The NCNC espoused self-determination for ethnic
 minorities but only in accordance with its advocacy of a unitary state.
 The Action Group also supported such movements, including the
 restoration of the northern Yoruba area (Ilorin) to the Western Region,
 but as part of a multistate, federal Nigeria. The NPC steadfastly
 opposed separatism in the Northern Region and attempted with some
 success to win over disaffected minorities in the middle belt.

Proposals were introduced for the creation of three states as a means
 of restructuring the regions along ethnic lines. The most extensive
 revision sought the separation of the middle belt from the Northern
 Region, a move the United Middle Belt Congress promoted. Serious riots
 in Tivland in 1960 and 1964 were related to this agitation. Another plan
 was put forward by the Edo and western Igbo to create the Midwestern
 Region by separating the whole tract adjacent to the Niger River from
 the Yoruba-dominated Western Region. At the same time, Ijaw and
 Efik-Ibibio ethnic groups proposed that the coast between the Niger
 Delta and Calabar become a new region in order to end Igbo dominance in
 that area. At this time, however, only the Midwestern Region achieved
 formal approval, despite opposition of the Action Group. The creation of
 the region was confirmed by plebiscite in 1963.

The creation of the Midwestern Region reopened the question of the
 internal restructuring of Nigeria. One motive for a more drastic
 restructuring was the desire to break up the Northern Region. That
 region, having more than half the country's population, controlled a
 majority of the seats in the House of Representatives. There was also
 the fear that the Igbo-dominated NCNC would gain control of the
 Midwestern legislature and thereby become even more powerful. A new
 political coalition, the Midwest Democratic Front (MDF), was formed by
 leaders of the Action Group and the United People's Party to contest the
 Midwestern Region election with the NCNC. During the campaign, the
 conservative United People's Party accepted support from the NPC, a fact
 that NCNC candidates stressed in their call to keep northern influence
 out of the region. Many Action Group workers withdrew support from the
 MDF in protest, and some allied themselves with the NCNC. In the 1964
 elections, the NCNC won by a landslide.

The Census Controversy

Because seats in the House of Representatives were apportioned on the
 basis of population, the constitutionally mandated decennial census had
 important political implications. The Northern Region's political
 strength, marshaled by the NPC, had arisen in large measure from the
 results of the 1952-53 census, which had identified 54 percent of the
 country's population in that area. A national campaign early in 1962
 addressed the significance of the forthcoming census. Politicians
 stressed the connection between the census and parliamentary
 representation on the one hand, and the amount of financial support for
 regional development on the other. The 1962 census was taken by head
 count, but there was evidence that many enumerators obtained their
 figures from heads of families, and many persons managed to be counted
 more than once.

Southern hopes for a favorable reapportionment of legislative seats
 were buoyed by preliminary results, which gave the south a clear
 majority. A supplementary count was immediately taken in the Northern
 Region that turned up an additional 9 million persons reportedly missed
 in the first count. Charges of falsification were voiced on all sides
 and led to an agreement among federal and regional governments to
 nullify the count and to conduct a new census.

The second nationwide census reported a population of 60.5 million,
 which census officials considered impossibly high. A scaled-down figure
 of 55.6 million, including 29.8 million in the Northern Region, finally
 was submitted and adopted by the federal government, leaving legislative
 apportionment virtually unchanged.

Demographers generally rejected the results of the 1963 census as
 inflated, arguing that the actual figure was as much as 10 million
 lower. Controversy over the census remained a lively political issue.
 NCNC leaders publicly charged the Northern Region's government with
 fraud, a claim that was denied by Balewa and by Bello, the regional
 prime minister.

Popular Disillusionment and Political Realignment

The conspiracy trials that led to the conviction of two of the
 country's most dynamic politicians, Awolowo and Enahoro, severely
 weakened public confidence in the political and judicial systems. Abuses
 were widespread, including intimidation of opponents by threats of
 criminal investigation, manipulation of the constitution and the courts,
 diversion of public funds to party and private use, rigging of
 elections, and corruption of public officials whose political patrons
 expected them to put party interests ahead of their legal
 responsibilities. Popular disillusion also intensified because
 politicians failed to produce benefits commensurate with constituents'
 expectations.

The volatile political scene leading up to elections in 1964 was
 ominous. The Action Group virtually disappeared from the federal
 parliament as a result of the Awolowo affair, thereby fundamentally
 altering political alignments at the national level. By early 1964,
 therefore, the federal parliament no longer had a recognized opposition.
 Akintola's party, which was renamed the Nigerian National Democratic
 Party in an effort to attract more support, now dominated the Western
 Region. The federal government nominally consisted of a consensus of the
 ruling parties of all four regions, but it was a fragile alliance at
 best and had emerged as a result of heavy-handed tactics. The NCNC had
 strengthened its position by gaining firm control of the Midwestern
 Region, so that it dominated two of the four regions. Akintola managed
 to undermine the NCNC in the Western Region, even though nationally he
 was pledged to an alliance with the NCNC. For its part, the NCNC
 denounced Akintola's party as a "tool of the NPC" and allied
 itself with remnants of the Action Group.

Political realignment was deceptive, however, because the basic
 divisions within the country remained unaltered. The NPC was reasonably
 secure in the Northern Region, despite the presence of minor parties,
 but it could not govern Nigeria alone, and alliances with any of the
 southern parties were ideologically incompatible and very tenuous. The
 NPC continued its dominance because of the inability of the other
 parties to find common ground among themselves and with northern
 progressives. Awolowo's pointed remarks in 1963 that democracy could be
 secured only if the Action Group and the NCNC could reach an
 accommodation that would remove the deadweight of the NPC from power
 fueled NPC concerns. The detention of Awolowo prevented that alliance
 from maturing, but it did not result in greater political stability.
 Indeed the alliance between the NPC and NCNC, which had dominated
 federal politics and destroyed the Action Group, now fell apart.

The 1964-65 Elections

The federal parliamentary election campaign in December 1964--the
 first since independence--was contested by two political alliances
 incorporating all the major parties. The Nigerian National Alliance
 (NNA) was composed of the NPC, Akintola's Western-based Nigerian
 National Democratic Party, and opposition parties representing ethnic
 minorities in the Midwestern and Eastern regions. It was opposed by the
 United Progressive Grand Alliance (UPGA), which joined the NCNC and the
 remnants of the Action Group with two minority-based northern allies,
 the Northern Elements Progressive Union and the United Middle Belt
 Congress.

Not surprisingly, the NNA adopted a platform that reflected the views
 of the northern political elite and, hence, was an attempt by the NPC to
 gain firmer control of federal politics through an alliance with the
 Western Region. Its appeal to voters outside the north was based
 essentially on the advantages to be gained from associating with the
 party in power. The NNA preyed on Yoruba fears of Igbo domination of the
 federal government. The UPGA was employed in an attempt by the NCNC to
 use the two regional governments that it controlled as a springboard to
 domination of the federal government. Strategically it offered a
 reformist program, combining a planned economy that endorsed increased
 public spending while also encouraging private enterprise. The UPGA
 proposed to divide the country into states that reflected ethnicity. Its
 proposals were intended to undermine the existing regional basis of
 political power by creating a sufficient number of states in each region
 so that none of the mayor ethnic groups--Hausa, Yoruba, or Igbo--could
 dominate region. The UPGA presented itself as an alternative to northern
 and, more specifically, to Hausa-Fulani domination of the federal
 government. Convinced that it would win if the election were held in an
 atmosphere free from interference by ruling parties in the Northern
 Region and the Western Region, the UPGA spent most of its efforts
 denouncing what it regarded as NNA intentions to rig the election in
 those regions.

The election was postponed for several weeks because of discrepancies
 between the number of names on voting rolls and on census returns. Even
 then the UPGA was not satisfied and called on its supporters to boycott
 the election. The boycott was effective in the Eastern Region, where
 polling places did not open in fifty-one constituencies that had more
 than one candidate running for office. In other constituencies in the
 region, UPGA candidates ran unopposed. Nationwide, only 4 million voters
 cast ballots, out of 15 million who were eligible. The NNA elected 198
 candidates, of whom 162 represented the NPC, from the 261 constituencies
 returning results. After an embarrassing delay, President Azikiwe agreed
 to ask Balewa to form a government with the NNA majority. The boycott
 had failed to stop the election, and in March 1965 supplementary
 elections were held in those areas in the Eastern Region and in Lagos
 where the boycott had been honored. UPGA candidates were elected in all
 these constituencies, bringing the NCNC-dominated coalition a total of
 108 seats in the House of Representatives. The UPGA became the official
 opposition.

After this decisive defeat, the UPGA prepared for the November 1965
 legislative election in the Western Region in an attempt to gain control
 of the three southern regions and the Federal Territory of Lagos, the
 region surrounding the capital. If successful, the NPC-dominated NNA
 still would have controlled the House of Representatives, but it would
 have given the predominantly southern UPGA a majority in the Senate,
 whose members were chosen by the regional legislatures.

Once more NCNC strategy failed. Amid widespread charges of voting
 irregularities, Akintola's NNDP, supported by its NPC ally, scored an
 impressive victory in November. There were extensive protests, including
 considerable grumbling among senior army officials, at the apparent
 perversion of the democratic process. In the six months after the
 election, an estimated 2,000 people died in violence that erupted in the
 Western Region. In the face of the disorders, the beleaguered Balewa
 delegated extraordinary powers to the regional governments to deal with
 the situation. By this time, Azikiwe and the prime minister were
 scarcely on speaking terms, and there were suggestions that Nigeria's
 armed forces should restore order.

In January 1966, army officers attempted to seize power. In a
 well-coordinated action, the conspirators, most of whom were Igbo,
 assassinated Balewa in Lagos, Akintola in Ibadan, and Bello in Kaduna,
 as well as senior officers of northern origin. In a public proclamation,
 the coup leaders pledged to establish a strong and efficient government
 committed to a progressive program and eventually to new elections. They
 vowed to stamp out corruption and to suppress violence. Despite the
 bloody and calculated character of the coup, these sentiments appealed
 directly to younger, educated Nigerians in all parts of the country.

The army's commander in chief, Major General Johnson Aguiyi Ironsi,
 quickly intervened to restore discipline within the army. In the absence
 of Azikiwe, who was undergoing treatment in a London hospital, Balewa's
 shaken cabinet resigned, leaving the reins of authority to the armed
 forces. Ironsi, also an Igbo, suspended the constitution, dissolved all
 legislative bodies, banned political parties, and as an interim measure
 formed a Federal Military Government (FMG) to prepare the country for a
 return to civilian rule at an unspecified date. He appointed military
 governors in each region and assigned officers to ministerial positions,
 instructing them to implement sweeping institutional reforms.

Ironsi and his advisers favored a unitary form of government, which
 they thought would eliminate the intransigent regionalism that had been
 the stumbling block to political and economic progress. A decree issued
 in March abolished the federation and unified the federal and regional
 civil services. Civilian experts, largely Igbo, set to work on a new
 constitution that would provide for a centralized unitary government
 such as the NCNC had favored since the 1950s.

Although the decree contained a number of concessions to regional
 interests, including protection of northerners from southern competition
 in the civil service, Ironsi's action showed dangerous disregard for the
 nuances of regional politics and badly misjudged the intensity of ethnic
 sensitivities in the aftermath of the bloody coup. The failure of the
 military government to prosecute Igbo officers responsible for murdering
 northern leaders stirred animosities further. Igbo civil servants and
 merchants residing in the north made the situation even worse through
 their triumphant support for the coup. Furthermore, Ironsi was
 vulnerable to accusations of favoritism toward the Igbo. The coup was
 perceived not so much as an effort to impose a unitary government as a
 plot by the Igbo to dominate Nigeria. Likewise, many Muslims saw the
 military decrees as Christianinspired attempts to undermine emirate
 government.

Troops of northern origin, who made up the bulk of the infantry,
 became increasingly restive. Fighting broke out between them and Igbo
 soldiers in garrisons in the south. In June mobs in the northern cities,
 abetted by local officials, carried out a pogrom against resident Igbo,
 massacring several hundred people and destroying Igbo-owned property.
 Some northern leaders spoke seriously of secession. Many northerners
 feared that Ironsi intended to deprive them of power and to consolidate
 further an Igbo-dominated centralized state.

In July northern officers and army units staged a countercoup, during
 which Ironsi and a number of other Igbo officers were killed. The Muslim
 officers named thirty-one-year- old Lieutenant Colonel (later Major
 General) Yakubu "Jack" Gowon, a Christian from a small ethnic
 group (the Anga) in the middle belt, as a compromise candidate to head
 the FMG. A young and relatively obscure officer serving as army chief of
 staff, Gowon had not been involved in the coup, but he enjoyed wide
 support among northern troops who subsequently insisted that he be given
 a position in the ruling body. His first act was to repeal the Ironsi
 decree and to restore federalism, a step followed by the release of
 Awolowo and Enahoro from prison.