The sixteenth century marked a high point in the political history of
 northern Nigeria. During this period, the Songhai Empire reached its
 greatest limits, stretching from the Senegal and Gambia rivers in the
 far west and incorporating part of Hausaland in the east. At the same
 time, the Sayfawa Dynasty of Borno asserted itself, conquering Kanem and
 extending its control westward to Hausa cities that were not under
 Songhai imperial rule. For almost a century, much of northern Nigeria
 was part of one or the other of these empires, and after the 1590s Borno
 dominated the region for 200 years.

Songhai's sway over western Hausaland included the subordination of
 Kebbi, whose kanta (king) controlled the territory along the
 Sokoto River. Katsina and Gobir also paid tribute to Songhai, while
 Songhai merchants dominated the trade of the Hausa towns. It was at this
 time that the overland trade in kola nuts from the Akan forests of
 modern Ghana was initiated. Largely because of Songhai's influence,
 there was a remarkable blossoming of Islamic learning and culture.

The influence of Songhai collapsed abruptly in 1591, when an army
 from Morocco crossed the Sahara and conquered the capital city of Gao
 and the commercial center of Timbuktu. Morocco was not able to control
 the whole empire, and the various provinces, including the Hausa states,
 became independent. The collapse undermined Songhai's commercial and
 religious hegemony over the Hausa states and abruptly altered the course
 of history in the region.

Borno reached its apogee under mai Idris Aloma (ca.
 1569-1600), during whose reign Kanem was reconquered. As a result of his
 campaigns, several Hausa cities, including Kano and Katsina, became
 tributaries. The destruction of Songhai left Borno uncontested as an
 imperial force, and during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
 Borno continued to dominate the political history of northern Nigeria.
 Now Borno became the center of Islamic learning and trade. Its capital
 at Birni Gazargamu, on the Komadugu Yobe River that flows eastward into
 Lake Chad, was well situated in the midst of a prosperous agricultural
 district. Textile production was a mainstay of its economy. Borno also
 controlled extensive salt deposits, which supplied its most important
 export to the west and south. These reserves were located at Bilma and
 Fachi in the Sahara, in the districts of Mangari and Muniyo adjacent to
 Birni Gazargamu, and on the northeastern shores of Lake Chad.

Despite Borno's hegemony, the Hausa states wrestled for ascendancy
 among themselves for much of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
 Gobir, Katsina, Zamfara, Kano, Kebbi, and Zaria formed various
 alliances, but only Zamfara ceased to exist as an autonomous state,
 falling to Gobir in the eighteenth century. Borno collected tribute from
 Kano and Katsina, and its merchants dominated the trade routes that
 passed through Hausaland. Gradually, however, Borno's position began to
 weaken. Its inability to check the political rivalries of the competing
 Hausa cities was one example of this decline. Another factor was the
 military threat of the Tuareg, whose warriors, centered at Agades in the
 center of present-day Nigeria, penetrated the northern districts of
 Borno. They even diverted the salt trade of Bilma and Fachi from Birni
 Gazargamu. Tuareg military superiority depended upon camels, which also
 were used to transport salt and dates to the savanna.

The major cause of Borno's decline was a severe drought and famine
 that struck the whole Sahel and savanna from Senegal to Ethiopia in the
 middle of the eighteenth century. There had been periodic droughts
 before; two serious droughts, one of seven years' duration, hit Borno in
 the seventeenth century. But the great drought of the 1740s and 1750s
 probably caused the most severe famine that the Sahel has known over the
 past several hundred years, including that of the 1970s. As a
 consequence of the mid-eighteenth century drought, Borno lost control of
 much of its northern territories to the Tuareg, whose mobility allowed
 them the flexibility to deal with famine conditions through war and
 plunder. Borno regained some of its former might in the succeeding
 decades, but another drought occurred in the 1790s, again weakening the
 state.

The ecological and political instability of the eighteenth century
 provided the background for the momentous events of the first decade of
 the nineteenth century, when the jihad of Usman dan Fodio revolutionized
 the whole of northern Nigeria. The military rivalries of the Hausa
 states and the political weakness of Borno put a severe strain on the
 economic resources of the region, just at a time when drought and famine
 undermined the prosperity of farmers and herders. Many Fulani moved into
 Hausaland and Borno at this time to escape areas where drought
 conditions were even worse, and their arrival increased tensions because
 they had no loyalty to the political authorities, who saw them as a
 source of increased taxation. By the end of the eighteenth century, some
 Muslim clerics began to articulate the grievances of the common people.
 Political efforts to eliminate or control these clerics only heightened
 the tensions. The stage was set for jihad.