The armed forces chose thirty-eight-year-old Brigadier (later
 General) Murtala Ramat Muhammad, a Muslim northerner, to succeed Gowon.
 A Hausa, trained at the British military academy at Sandhurst, Murtala
 Muhammad had command of federal field forces in the final phase of the
 civil war, including being responsible for the abortive efforts to cross
 the Niger River. He was not directly involved in the coup d'état that
 brought him to power, but he had played a prominent role in rallying
 northern officers behind the July 1966 coup that felled Ironsi. In a
 short time, Murtala Muhammad's policies won him broad popular support,
 and his decisiveness elevated him to the status of a national hero.

One of his first acts was to scrap the 1973 census, which was
 weighted in favor of the north, and to revert to the 1963 count for
 official purposes. Murtala Muhammad removed top federal and state
 officials to break links with the Gowon regime and to restore public
 confidence in the federal government. More than 10,000 public officials
 and employees were dismissed without benefits, on account of age,
 health, incompetence, or malpractice. The purge affected the civil
 service, judiciary, police and armed forces, diplomatic service, public
 corporations, and universities. Some officials were brought to trial on
 charges of corruption, and one former military state governor was
 executed for gross misconduct in office. Murtala Muhammad also began the
 demobilization of 100,000 troops from the swollen ranks of the armed
 forces.

Twelve of the twenty-five ministerial posts on the new Federal
 Executive Council went to civilians, but the cabinet was secondary to
 the executive Supreme Military Council. Murtala Muhammad imposed the
 authority of the federal government in areas formerly reserved for the
 states, restricting the latitude exercised by state governments and
 their governors in determining and executing policy. Newly appointed
 military governors of the states were not given seats on the Supreme
 Military Coucil, but instead were expected to administer federal
 policies handed down by Murtala Muhammad through the military coucil.
 The federal government took over the operation of the country's two
 largest newspapers, made broadcasting a federal monopoly, and brought
 remaining state-run universities under federal control.

Murtala Muhammad initiated a comprehensive review of the Third
 National Development Plan. Singling out inflation as the greatest danger
 to the economy, he was determined to reduce the money supply that had
 been swollen by government expenditures on public works. Murtala
 Muhammad also announced that his government would encourage the rapid
 expansion of the private sector into areas dominated by public
 corporations. He reappraised foreign policy, stressing a "Nigeria
 first" orientation in line with OPEC price guidelines that was to
 the disadvantage of other African countries. Nigeria became
 "neutral" rather than "nonaligned" in international
 affairs. The shift in orientation became apparent with respect to
 Angola. Nigeria had worked with the OAU to bring about a negotiated
 reconciliation of the warring factions in the former Portuguese colony,
 but late in 1975 Murtala Muhammad announced Nigeria's support for the
 Soviet-backed Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (Movimento
 Popular de Libertação de Angola--MPLA), citing South Africa's armed
 intervention on the side of the rival National Union for the Total
 Independence of Angola (União Nacional para a Indepêndencia Total de
 Angola--UNITA). The realignment strained relations with the United
 States, which argued for the withdrawal of Cuban troops and Soviet
 advisers from Angola. In October the Nigerian air force took delivery of
 Soviet-built aircraft that had been ordered under Gowon.