In 1807 the Houses of Parliament in London enacted legislation
 prohibiting British subjects from participating in the slave trade.
 Indirectly, this legislation was one of the reasons for the collapse of
 Oyo. Britain withdrew from the slave trade while it was the major
 transporter of slaves to the Americas. Furthermore, the French had been
 knocked out of the trade during the French Revolution beginning in 1789
 and by the Napoleonic wars of the first fifteen years of the nineteenth
 century. Between them, the French and the British had purchased a
 majority of the slaves sold from the ports of Oyo. The commercial
 uncertainty that followed the disappearance of the major purchasers of
 slaves unsettled the economy of Oyo. Ironically, the political troubles
 in Oyo came to a head after 1817, when the transatlantic market for
 slaves once again boomed. Rather than supplying slaves from other areas,
 however, Oyo itself became the source of slaves.

British legislation forbade ships under British registry to engage in
 the slave trade, but the restriction was applied generally to all flags
 and was intended to shut down all traffic in slaves coming out of West
 African ports. Other countries more or less hesitantly followed the
 British lead. The United States, for example, also prohibited the slave
 trade in 1807 (Denmark actually was the first country to declare the
 trade illegal in 1792). Attitudes changed slowly, however, and not all
 countries cooperated in controlling the activity of their merchant
 ships. American ships, for instance, were notorious for evading the
 prohibition and going unpunished under United States law. It should be
 noted, moreover, that the abolition movement concentrated on the
 transatlantic trade for more than five decades before eventually
 becoming a full-fledged attack on slave trading within Africa itself.

The Royal Navy maintained a prevention squadron to blockade the
 coast, and a permanent station was established at the Spanish colony of
 Fernando Po, off the Nigerian coast, with responsibility for patrolling
 the West African coast. For several decades, as much as one-sixth of all
 British warships were assigned to this mission, and a squadron was
 maintained at Fernando Po from 1827 until 1844. Slaves rescued at sea
 were usually taken to Sierra Leone, where they were released. British
 naval crews were permitted to divide prize money from the sale of
 captured slave ships. Apprehended slave runners were tried by naval
 courts and were liable to capital punishment if found guilty.

Still, a lively slave trade to the Americas continued into the 1860s.
 The demands of Cuba and Brazil were met by a flood of captives taken in
 wars among the Yoruba and shipped from Lagos, while the Aro continued to
 supply the delta ports with slave exports through the 1830s. Despite the
 British blockade, almost 1 million slaves were exported from Nigeria in
 the nineteenth century. The risk involved in running the British
 blockade obviously made profits all the greater on delivery.

The campaign to eradicate the slave trade and substitute for it trade
 in other commodities increasingly resulted in British intervention in
 the internal affairs of the Nigerian region during the nineteenth
 century and ultimately led to the decision to assume jurisdiction over
 the coastal area. Suppression of the slave trade and issues related to
 slavery remained at the forefront of British dealings with local states
 and societies for the rest of the nineteenth century and even into the
 twentieth century.

Lagos, where the British concentrated activities after 1851, had been
 founded as a colony of Benin in about 1700. A long dynastic struggle,
 which became entwined with the struggle against the slave trade,
 resulted in the overthrow of the reigning oba and the
 renunciation of a treaty with Britain to curtail the slave trade.
 Britain was determined to halt the traffic in slaves fed by the Yoruba
 wars, and responded to this frustration by annexing the port of Lagos in
 1861. Thereafter, Britain gradually extended its control along the
 coast. British intervention became more insistent in the 1870s and 1880s
 as a result of pressure from missionaries and liberated slaves returning
 from Sierra Leone. There was also the necessity of protecting commerce
 disrupted by the fighting. The method of dealing with these problems was
 to dictate treaties that inevitably led to further annexations.