Prodded by the instability created by the Yoruba wars and by the
 activities of other European powers, Britain moved cautiously but
 inexorably toward colonial domination of the lower Niger Basin. In the
 decades that followed its abolition of the slave trade, British
 diplomacy wove a fabric of treaties with kings and chieftains whose
 cooperation was sought in suppressing the traffic. British interests
 also dictated occasional armed intervention by the Royal Navy and by the
 Royal Niger Company Constabulary to staunch the flow of slaves to the
 coast, to protect legitimate commerce, and to maintain peace. Moreover,
 the missionaries cried out for protection and assistance in stamping out
 slavery and other "barbarous practices" associated with
 indigenous religions. Finally, the posting of consular officials by the
 Foreign Office to service the increasing amount of trade in the ports of
 the bights of Benin and Biafra helped project British influence inland.

For many years, official hesitation about adding tropical
 dependencies to the British Empire outweighed these factors. The
 prevailing sentiment, even after Lagos became a colony in 1861, was
 expressed in a parliamentary report in 1865 urging withdrawal from West
 Africa. Colonies were regarded as expensive liabilities, especially
 where trading concessions could be exercised without resorting to
 annexation. Attitudes changed, however, as rival European powers,
 especially France and Germany, scurried to develop overseas markets and
 annexed territory.

Inevitably, imperial ambitions clashed when the intentions of the
 various European countries became obvious. In 1885 at the Berlin
 Conference, the European powers attempted to resolve their conflicts of
 interest by allotting areas of exploitation. The conferees also
 enunciated the principle, known as the dual mandate, that the best
 interests of Europe and Africa would be served by maintaining free
 access to the continent for trade and by providing Africa with the
 benefits of Europe's civilizing mission. Britain's claims to a sphere of
 influence in the Niger Basin were acknowledged formally, but it was
 stipulated here as elsewhere that only effective occupation would secure
 full international recognition. In the end, pressure in the region from
 France and Germany hastened the establishment of effective British
 occupation.