After having been assigned for six years as governor of Hong Kong,
 Lugard returned to Nigeria in 1912 to set in motion the merger of the
 northern and southern protectorates. The task of unification was
 achieved two years later on the eve of World War I. The principle of
 indirect rule administered by traditional rulers was applied throughout
 Nigeria, and colonial officers were instructed to interfere as little as
 possible with the existing order. In 1916 Lugard formed the Nigerian
 Council, a consultative body that brought together six traditional
 leaders--including the sultan of Sokoto, the emir of Kano, and the king
 of Oyo--to represent all parts of the colony. The council was promoted
 as a device for allowing the expression of opinions that could instruct
 the governor. In practice Lugard used the annual sessions to inform the
 traditional leaders of British policy, leaving them with no functions at
 the council's meetings except to listen and to assent.

Unification meant only the loose affiliation of three distinct
 regional administrations into which Nigeria was subdivided--northern,
 western, and eastern regions. Each was under a lieutenant governor and
 provided independent government services. The governor was, in effect,
 the coordinator for virtually autonomous entities that had overlapping
 economic interests but little in common politically or socially. In the
 Northern Region, the colonial government took careful account of Islam
 and avoided any appearance of a challenge to traditional values that
 might incite resistance to British rule. This system, in which the
 structure of authority focused on the emir to whom obedience was a mark
 of religious devotion, did not welcome change. As the emirs settled more
 and more into their role as reliable agents of indirect rule, colonial
 authorities were content to maintain the status quo, particularly in
 religious matters. Christian missionaries were barred, and the limited
 government efforts in education were harmonized with Islamic
 institutions.

In the south, by contrast, traditional leaders were employed as
 vehicles of indirect rule in Yorubaland, but Christianity and Western
 education undermined their sacerdotal functions. In some instances,
 however, a double allegiance--to the idea of sacred monarchy for its
 symbolic value and to modern concepts of law and administration--was
 maintained. Out of reverence for traditional kingship, for instance, the
 oni of Ife, whose office was closely identified with Yoruba
 religion, was accepted as the sponsor of a Yoruba political movement. In
 the Eastern Region, appointed officials who were given
 "warrants" and hence called warrant chiefs, were vehemently
 resisted because they had no claims on tradition.

In practice, however, British administrative procedures under
 indirect rule entailed constant interaction between colonial authorities
 and local rulers--the system was modified to fit the needs of each
 region. In the north, for instance, legislation took the form of a
 decree cosigned by the governor and the emir, while in the south, the
 governor sought the approval of the Legislative Council. Hausa was
 recognized as an official language in the north, and knowledge of it was
 expected of colonial officers serving there, whereas only English had
 official status in the south. Regional administrations also varied
 widely in the quality of local personnel and in the scope of the
 operations they were willing to undertake. British staffs in each region
 continued to operate according to procedures developed before
 unification. Economic links among the regions increased, but indirect
 rule tended to discourage political interchange. There was virtually no
 pressure for fuller unity until the end of World War II.

Public works, such as harbor dredging and road and railroad
 construction, opened Nigeria to economic development. British soap and
 cosmetics manufacturers tried to obtain land concessions for growing oil
 palms, but these were refused. Instead, the companies had to be content
 with a monopoly of the export trade in these products. Other commercial
 crops such as cocoa and rubber also were encouraged, and tin was mined
 on the Jos Plateau. The only significant interruption in economic
 development arose from natural disaster--the great drought of 1913-14.
 Recovery came quickly, however, and improvements in port facilities and
 the transportation infrastructure during World War I furthered economic
 development. Nigerian recruits participated in the war effort as
 laborers and soldiers. The Nigeria Regiment of the RWAFF, integrating
 troops from the north and south, saw action against German colonial
 forces in Cameroon and in German East Africa. During the war, the
 colonial government earmarked a large portion of the Nigerian budget as
 a contribution to imperial defense. To raise additional revenues, Lugard
 took steps to institute a uniform tax structure patterned on the
 traditional system that he had adopted in the north during his tenure
 there. Taxes became a source of discontent in the south, however, and
 contributed to disturbances protesting British policy. In 1920 portions
 of former German Cameroon were mandated to Britain by the League of
 Nations and were administered as part of Nigeria.

Until he stepped down as governor general in 1918, Lugard primarily
 was concerned with consolidating British sovereignty and with assuring
 local administration through traditional leaders. He was contemptuous of
 the educated and Westernized African elite, and he even recommended
 transferring the capital from Lagos, the cosmopolitan city where the
 influence of these people was most pronounced, to Kaduna in the north.
 Although the capital was not moved, Lugard's bias in favor of the Muslim
 north was clear at the time. Nevertheless, Lugard was able to bequeath
 to his successor a prosperous colony when his term as governor general
 expired.