LIKE SO MANY OTHER MODERN AFRICAN states, Nigeria is the creation of
 European imperialism. Its very name--after the great Niger River, the
 country's dominating physical feature--was suggested in the 1890s by
 British journalist Flora Shaw, who later became the wife of colonial
 governor Frederick Lugard. The modern history of Nigeria--as a political
 state encompassing 250 to 400 ethnic groups of widely varied cultures
 and modes of political organization--dates from the completion of the
 British conquest in 1903 and the amalgamation of northern and southern
 Nigeria into the Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria in 1914. The history
 of the Nigerian people extends backward in time for some three
 millennia. Archaeological evidence, oral traditions, and written
 documentation establish the existence of dynamic societies and
 well-developed political systems whose history had an important
 influence on colonial rule and has continued to shape independent
 Nigeria. Nigerian history is fragmented in the sense that it evolved
 from a variety of traditions, but many of the most outstanding features
 of modern society reflect the strong influence of the three regionally
 dominant ethnic groups--the Hausa in the north, the Yoruba in the west,
 and the Igbo in the east.

There are several dominant themes in Nigerian history that are
 essential in understanding contemporary Nigerian politics and society.
 First, the spread of Islam, predominantly in the north but later in
 southwestern Nigeria as well, began a millennium ago. The creation of
 the Sokoto Caliphate in the jihad (holy war) of 1804-8 brought most of
 the northern region and adjacent parts of Niger and Cameroon under a
 single Islamic government. The great extension of Islam within the area
 of present-day Nigeria dates from the nineteenth century and the
 consolidation of the caliphate. This history helps account for the
 dichotomy between north and south and for the divisions within the north
 that have been so strong during the colonial and postcolonial eras.

Second, the slave trade, both across the Sahara Desert and the
 Atlantic Ocean, had a profound influence on virtually all parts of
 Nigeria. The transatlantic trade in particular accounted for the forced
 migration of perhaps 3.5 million people between the 1650s and the 1860s,
 while a steady stream of slaves flowed north across the Sahara for a
 millennium, ending at the beginning of the twentieth century. Within
 Nigeria, slavery was widespread, with social implications that are still
 evident today. The Sokoto Caliphate, for example, had more slaves than
 any other modern country, except the United States in 1860. Slaves were
 also numerous among the Igbo, the Yoruba, and many other ethnic groups.
 Indeed, many ethnic distinctions, especially in the middle belt--the
 area between the north and south--were reinforced because of slave
 raiding and defensive measures that were adopted for protection against
 enslavement. Conversion to Islam and the spread of Christianity were
 intricately associated with issues relating to slavery and with efforts
 to promote political and cultural autonomy.

Third, the colonial era was relatively brief, lasting only six
 decades or so, depending upon the part of Nigeria, but it unleashed such
 rapid change that the full impact was still felt in the contemporary
 period. On the one hand, the expansion of agricultural products as the
 principal export earner and the corresponding development of
 infrastructure resulted in severely distorted economic growth that has
 subsequently collapsed. On the other hand, social dislocation associated
 with the decline of slavery and the internal movement of population
 between regions and to the cities necessitated the reassessment of
 ethnic loyalties, which in turn have been reflected in politics and
 religion.

In the three decades since the independence of Nigeria in 1960, a
 period half as long as the colonial era, Nigeria has experienced a
 number of successful and attempted military coups d'état and a brutal
 civil war, let corrupt civilian governments siphon off the profits from
 the oil boom of the 1970s, and faced economic collapse in the 1980s. As
 the most populous country in Africa, and one of the ten most populous
 countries in the world, Nigeria has a history that is important in its
 own right but that also bears scrutiny if for no other reason than to
 understand how and why this nation became as it is today.