Lieutenant General Olusegun Obasanjo, a Yoruba, succeeded Murtala
 Muhammad. As chief of staff of Supreme Headquarters, Obasanjo was
 Murtala Muhammad's deputy and had the support of the military. He had
 commanded the federal division that took Owerri, effectively bringing an
 end to the civil war. Keeping the chain of command established by
 Murtala Muhammad in place, Obasanjo pledged to continue the program for
 the restoration of civilian government in 1979 and to carry forward the
 reform program to improve the quality of public service.

The draft constitution was published in October 1976, anticipating
 the seating of a constituent assembly in 1977. Debates during sessions
 of the drafting committee were frequently ideological in nature, but
 divisive proposals, such as the attempt to define Nigeria as a
 "socialist" state, were decisively rejected. Committee members
 discarded Murtala Muhammad's recommendations for a nonparty system, but
 they insisted that parties applying for registration had to have
 national objectives and executive boards whose members represented at
 least twothirds of the states. The model for the constitution, which was
 adopted in 1979, was based on the Constitution of the United States,
 with provision for a president, Senate, and House of Representatives.
 The country was now ready for local elections, to be followed by
 national elections, that would return Nigeria to civilian rule.

The military regimes of Murtala Muhammad and Obasanjo benefited from
 a tremendous influx of oil revenue that increased 350 percent between
 1973 and 1974, when oil prices skyrocketed, to 1979, when the military
 stepped down. Increased revenues permitted massive spending that
 unfortunately, was poorly planned and concentrated in urban areas. The
 oil boom was marred by a minor recession in 1978-79, but revenues
 rebounded until mid1981 . The increase in revenues made possible a rapid
 rise in income, especially for the urban middle class. There was a
 corresponding inflation, particularly in the price of food, that
 promoted both industrialization and the expansion of agricultural
 production. As a result of the shift to food crops, the traditional
 export earners--peanuts, cotton, cocoa, and palm products--declined in
 significance and then ceased to be important at all. Nigeria's exports
 became dominated by oil.

Industrialization, which had grown slowly after World War II through
 the civil war, boomed in the 1970s, despite many infrastructure
 constraints. Growth was particularly pronounced in the production and
 assembly of consumer goods, including vehicle assembly and the
 manufacture of soap and detergents, soft drinks, pharmaceuticals, beer,
 paint, and building materials. Furthermore, there was extensive
 investment in infrastructure from 1975 to 1980, and the number of
 parastatals--jointly government- and privately owned
 companies--proliferated. The Nigerian Enterprises Promotion decrees of
 1972 and 1977 further encouraged the growth of an indigenous middle
 class.

Plans were undertaken for the movement of the federal capital from
 Lagos to a more central location in the interior at Abuja. Such a step
 was seen as a means of encouraging the spread of industrial development
 inland and of relieving the congestion that threatened to choke Lagos.
 Abuja also was chosen because it was not identified with any particular
 ethnic group.

Heavy investment was planned in steel production. With Soviet
 assistance, a steel mill was developed at Ajaokuta in Kwara State, not
 far from Abuja. The most significant negative sign was the decline of
 industry associated with agriculture, but largescale irrigation projects
 were launched in the states of Borno, Kano, Sokoto, and Bauchi under
 World Bank (see Glossary) auspices.

Education also expanded rapidly. At the start of the civil war, there
 were only five universities, but by 1975 the number had increased to
 thirteen, with seven more established over the next several years. In
 1975 there were 53,000 university students. There were similar advances
 in primary and secondary school education, particularly in those
 northern states that had lagged behind.