The legitimate trade in commodities attracted a number of rough-hewn
 British merchants to the Niger River, as well as some men who had been
 formerly engaged in the slave trade but who now changed their line of
 wares. The large companies that subsequently opened depots in the delta
 cities and in Lagos were as ruthlessly competitive as the delta towns
 themselves and frequently used force to compel potential suppliers to
 agree to contracts and to meet their demands. The most important of
 these trading companies, whose activities had far-reaching consequences
 for Nigeria, was the United Africa Company, founded by George Goldie in
 1879. In 1886 Goldie's consortium was chartered by the British
 government as the Royal Niger Company and granted broad concessionary
 powers in "all the territory of the basin of the Niger."
 Needless to say, these concessions emanated from Britain, not from any
 authority in Nigeria.

The terms of the charter specified that trade should be free in the
 region--a principle systematically violated as the company strengthened
 its monopoly to forestall French and German trade interests. The company
 also was supposed to respect local customs "except so far as may be
 necessary in the interests of humanity." The qualifying clause was
 aimed at slavery and other activities categorized as "barbarous
 practices" by British authorities, and it foreshadowed the
 qualifications applied to noninterference as a guide to official policy
 when Britain assumed formal colonial responsibility in Nigeria.

Meanwhile, the Royal Niger Company established its headquarters far
 inland at Lokoja, from where it pretended to assume responsibility for
 the administration of areas along the Niger and Benue rivers where it
 maintained depots. The company interfered in the territory along the
 Niger and the Benue, sometimes becoming embroiled in serious conflicts
 when its British-led native constabulary intercepted slave raids or
 attempted to protect trade routes. The company negotiated treaties with
 Sokoto, Gwandu, and Nupe that were interpreted as guaranteeing exclusive
 access to trade in return for the payment of annual tribute. Officials
 of the Sokoto Caliphate considered these treaties quite differently;
 from their perspective, the British were granted only extraterritorial
 rights that did not prevent similar arrangements with the Germans and
 the French and certainly did not surrender sovereignty.

Under Goldie's direction, the Royal Niger Company was instrumental in
 depriving France and Germany of access to the region. Consequently, he
 may well deserve the epithet "father of Nigeria," which
 imperialists accorded him. He definitely laid the basis for British
 claims.