The development of "legitimate" trade was the final phase
 of private and official British efforts to find a positive alternative
 to the traffic in slaves. Earlier aspects of such constructive interest
 had included the founding of the colony at Sierra Leone in 1787 as a
 refuge for liberated slaves, the missionary movement designed to bring
 Christianity to the region, and programs of exploration sponsored by
 learned societies and scientific groups, such as the London-based
 African Association.

The principal commodities of legitimate trade were palm oil and palm
 kernels, which were used in Europe to make soap and as lubricants for
 machinery before petroleum products were developed for that purpose.
 Although this trade grew to significant proportions--palm oil exports
 alone were worth £1 million a year by 1840--it was concentrated near
 the coast, where palm trees grew in abundance. Gradually, however, the
 trade forced major economic and social changes in the interior, although
 it hardly undermined slavery and the slave trade. Quite the contrary,
 the incidence of slavery in local societies actually increased.

Initially most palm oil (and later kernels) came from Igboland, where
 palm trees formed a canopy over the densely inhabited areas of the Ngwa,
 Nri, Awka, and other Igbo peoples. Palm oil was used locally for
 cooking, the kernels were a source for food, trees were tapped for palm
 wine, and the fronds were used for building material. It was a
 relatively simple adjustment for many Igbo families to transport the oil
 to rivers and streams that led to the Niger Delta for sale to European
 merchants. The rapid expansion in exports, especially after 1830,
 occurred precisely at the time slave exports collapsed. Instead, slaves
 were redirected into the domestic economy, especially to grow the staple
 food crop, yams, in northern Igboland for marketing throughout the
 palm-tree belt. As before, Aro merchants dominated trade, including the
 sale of slaves within Igboland as well as palm products to the coast.
 They maintained their central role in the confederation that governed
 the region.

The Niger Delta and Calabar, which once had been known for the export
 of slaves, now became famous for the export of palm oil, so much so that
 the delta streams were given the name the "oil rivers." The
 basic economic units in each town were "houses,"
 family-operated entities that were also the focus of loyalty for those
 employed in them. A "house" included the extended family of
 the trader, both his retainers and slaves. As its head, the master
 trader taxed other traders who were members of his "house" and
 was obligated to maintain a war vessel, which was a large dugout canoe
 that could hold several tons of cargo and dozens of crew, for the
 defense of the harbor. Whenever a trader could afford to keep a war
 canoe, he was expected to form his own "house". Economic
 competition among these "houses" was so fierce that trade
 often erupted into armed battle between the large canoes.

Because of the hazards of climate and disease for Europeans and the
 absence of any authority responsive to their interests on the mainland,
 European merchants ordinarily moored their ships outside harbors or in
 the delta and used the ships as trading stations and warehouses. In
 time, however, they built depots onshore and eventually moved up the
 Niger River to stations established in the interior, like that at
 Onitsha, where they could bargain with local suppliers and purchase
 products likely to turn a profit. Some European traders switched to
 legitimate business only when the commerce in slaves became too
 hazardous. Disreputable as many of the traders had been, they often
 suffered from the precariousness of their position and were at the mercy
 of what they considered to be unpredictable coastal rulers. Accordingly,
 as the volume of trade increased, the British government responded to
 repeated requests of merchants to appoint a consul to cover the region.
 Consequently in 1849, John Beecroft was accredited as consul for the
 bights of Benin and Biafra, a jurisdiction stretching from Dahomey to
 Cameroon. Beecroft was the British representative to Fernando Po, where
 the British navy's prevention squadron was stationed.

Exploration of the Niger Basin had a commercial as well as scientific
 motivation, but curiosity about the course and destination of the river
 also played a part. The delta masked the mouth of the great river, and
 for centuries Nigerians chose not to tell Europeans the secrets of the
 interior, initially probably because no one thought to ask but by the
 nineteenth century because of the commercial implications. In 1794 the
 African Association commissioned Mungo Park, an intrepid Scottish
 physician and naturalist, to search for the headwaters of the Niger and
 follow the river downstream. Park reached the upper Niger the next year
 by traveling inland from the Gambia River. Although he reported on the
 eastward flow of the Niger, he was forced to turn back when his
 equipment was lost to Muslim slave traders. In 1805 he set out on a
 second expedition, sponsored by the British government, to follow the
 Niger to the sea. His mission failed, but Park and his party covered
 more than 1,500 kilometers, passing through the western portions of the
 Sokoto Caliphate, before being drowned in rapids near Bussa.

On a subsequent expedition to the Sokoto Caliphate, Hugh Clapperton
 learned where the Niger River flowed to the sea, but Clapperton also
 died before he could substantiate his information. It was his servant,
 Richard Lander, and Lander's brother, John, who actually demonstrated
 that the Niger flowed into the delta. The Lander brothers were seized by
 slave traders in the interior and sold down the river to a waiting
 European ship.

Initial attempts to open trade with the interior by way of the Niger
 could not overcome climate and disease, which took the lives of a third
 of a British riverine expedition in 1842. Use of quinine to combat
 malaria on similar expeditions in the 1850s enabled a Liverpool
 merchant, Macgregor Laird, to open the river. Laird's efforts were
 stimulated by the detailed reports of a pioneer German explorer,
 Heinrich Barth, who traveled through much of Borno and the Sokoto
 Caliphate and recorded information about the region's geography,
 economy, and inhabitants.