Long before 1500, much of present-day Nigeria was divided into
 states, which can be identified with the modern ethnic groups that trace
 their history to the origins of these states. These early states
 included the Yoruba kingdoms, the Edo kingdom of Benin, the Hausa
 cities, and Nupe. In addition, numerous small states to the west and
 south of Lake Chad were absorbed or displaced in the course of the
 expansion of Kanem, which was centered to the northeast of Lake Chad.
 Borno, initially the western province of Kanem, became independent in
 the late fourteenth century. Other states probably existed as well, but
 oral traditions and the absence of archaeological data do not permit an
 accurate dating of their antiquity.

Yoruba Kingdoms and Benin

As far as historical memory extends, the Yoruba have been the
 dominant group on the west bank of the Niger. Of mixed origin, they were
 the product of the assimilation of periodic waves of migrants who
 evolved a common language and culture. The Yoruba were organized in
 patrilineal descent groups that occupied village communities and
 subsisted on agriculture, but from about the eleventh century A.D.,
 adjacent village compounds, called ile, began to coalesce into
 a number of territorial citystates in which loyalties to the clan became
 subordinate to allegiance to a dynastic chieftain. This transition
 produced an urbanized political and social environment that was
 accompanied by a high level of artistic achievement, particularly in
 terracotta and ivory sculpture and in the sophisticated metal casting
 produced at Ife. The brass and bronze used by Yoruba artisans was a
 significant item of trade, made from copper, tin, and zinc either
 imported from North Africa or from mines in the Sahara and northern
 Nigeria.

The Yoruba placated a luxuriant pantheon headed by an impersonal
 deity, Olorun, and included lesser deities, some of them formerly
 mortal, who performed a variety of cosmic and practical tasks. One of
 them, Oduduwa, was regarded as the creator of the earth and the ancestor
 of the Yoruba kings. According to a creation myth, Oduduwa founded the
 city of Ife and dispatched his sons to establish other cities, where
 they reigned as priest-kings and presided over cult rituals. Formal
 traditions of this sort have been interpreted as poetic illustrations of
 the historical process by which Ife's ruling dynasty extended its
 authority over Yorubaland. The stories were attempts to legitimize the
 Yoruba monarchies--after they had supplanted clan loyalties--by claiming
 divine origin.

Ife was the center of as many as 400 religious cults whose traditions
 were manipulated to political advantage by the oni (king) in
 the days of the kingdom's greatness. Ife also lay at the center of a
 trading network with the north. The oni supported his court
 with tolls levied on trade, tribute exacted from dependencies, and
 tithes due him as a religious leader. One of Ife's greatest legacies to
 modern Nigeria is its beautiful sculpture associated with this
 tradition.

The oni was chosen on a rotating basis from one of several
 branches of the ruling dynasty, which was composed of a clan with
 several thousand members. Once elected, he went into seclusion in the
 palace compound and was not seen again by his people. Below the oni
 in the state hierarchy were palace officials, town chiefs, and the
 rulers of outlying dependencies. The palace officials were spokesmen for
 the oni and the rulers of dependencies who had their own
 subordinate officials. All offices, even that of the oni, were
 elective and depended on broad support within the community. Each
 official was chosen from among the eligible clan members who had
 hereditary right to the office. Members of the royal dynasty often were
 assigned to govern dependencies, while the sons of palace officials
 assumed lesser roles as functionaries, bodyguards to the oni,
 and judges.

During the fifteenth century, Oyo and Benin surpassed Ife as
 political and economic powers, although Ife preserved its status as a
 religious center even after its decline. Respect for the priestly
 functions of the oni of Ife and recognition of the common
 tradition of origin were crucial factors in the evolution of Yoruba
 ethnicity. The oni of Ife was recognized as the senior
 political official not only among the Yoruba but also at Benin, and he
 invested Benin's rulers with the symbols of temporal power.

The Ife model of government was adapted at Oyo, where a member of its
 ruling dynasty consolidated several smaller citystates under his
 control. A council of state, the Oyo Mesi, eventually assumed
 responsibility for naming the alafin (king) from candidates
 proposed from the ruling dynasty and acted as a check on his authority.
 Oyo developed as a constitutional monarchy; actual government was in the
 hands of the basorun (prime minister), who presided over the
 Oyo Mesi. The city was situated 170 kilometers north of Ife, and about
 100 kilometers north of present-day Oyo. Unlike the forest-bound Yoruba
 kingdoms, Oyo was in the savanna and drew its military strength from its
 cavalry forces, which established hegemony over the adjacent Nupe and
 the Borgu kingdoms and thereby developed trade routes farther to the
 north .

Figure 2. Yorubaland, Eleventh to Nineteenth Centuries
 established agricultural community in the Edo-speaking area, east of
 Ife, when it became a dependency of Ife at the beginning of the
 fourteenth century. By the fifteenth century, it took an independent
 course and became a major trading power in its own right, blocking Ife's
 access to the coastal ports as Oyo had cut off the mother city from the
 savanna. Political power and religious authority resided in the oba
 (king), who according to tradition was descended from the Ife dynasty.
 The oba was advised by a council of six hereditary chiefs, who
 also nominated his successor. Benin, which may have housed 100,000
 inhabitants at its height, spread over twenty-five square kilometers
 that were enclosed by three concentric rings of earthworks.
 Responsibility for administering the urban complex lay with sixty trade
 guilds, each with its own quarter, whose membership cut across clan
 affiliations and owed its loyalty directly to the oba. At his
 wooden, steepled palace, the oba presided over a large court
 richly adorned with brass, bronze, and ivory objects. Like Ife and the
 other Yoruba states, Benin, too, is famous for its sculpture.

Unlike the Yoruba kingdoms, however, Benin developed a centralized
 regime to oversee the administration of its expanding territories. By
 the late fifteenth century, Benin was in contact with Portugal. At its
 apogee in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Benin even
 encompassed parts of southeastern Yorubaland and the small Igbo area on
 the western bank of the Niger. Dependencies were governed by members of
 the royal family who were assigned several towns or villages scattered
 throughout the realm, rather than a block of territory that could be
 used as a base for revolt against the oba.

As is evident from this brief survey, Yoruba and Benin history were
 interconnected. In fact, areas to the west of Nigeria, in the modern
 Republic of Benin, were also closely associated with this history, both
 in the period before 1500 and afterward.

The Igbo: A Stateless Society?

Most scholars have argued that Igbo society was "stateless"
 and that the Igbo region did not evolve centralized political
 institutions before the colonial period. According to this theory, the
 relatively egalitarian Igbo lived in small, selfcontained groups of
 villages organized according to a lineage system that did not allow
 social stratification. An individual's fitness to govern was determined
 by his wisdom and his wisdom by his age and experience. Subsistence
 farming was the dominant economic activity, and yams were the staple
 crop. Land, obtained through inheritance, was the measure of wealth.
 Handicrafts and commerce were well developed, and a relatively dense
 population characterized the region.

Despite the absence of chiefs, some Igbo relied on an order of
 priests, chosen from outsiders on the northern fringe of Igboland, to
 ensure impartiality in settling disputes between communities. Igbo gods,
 like those of the Yoruba, were numerous, but their relationship to one
 another and to human beings was essentially egalitarian, thereby
 reflecting Igbo society as a whole. A number of oracles and local cults
 attracted devotees, while the central deity, the earth mother and
 fertility figure, Ala, was venerated at shrines throughout Igboland.

The weakness of this theory of statelessness rests on the paucity of
 historical evidence of precolonial Igbo society. There are huge lacunae
 between the archaeological finds of Igbo Ukwu, which reveal a rich
 material culture in the heart of the Igbo region in the eighth century
 A.D., and the oral traditions of the twentieth century. In particular,
 the importance of the Nri Kingdom, which appears to have flourished
 before the seventeenth century, often is overlooked. The Nri Kingdom was
 relatively small in geographical extent, but it is remembered as the
 cradle of Igbo culture. Finally, Benin exercised considerable influence
 on the western Igbo, who adopted many of the political structures
 familiar to the Yoruba-Benin region.

The Northern Kingdoms of the Savanna

Trade was the key to the emergence of organized communities in the
 savanna portions of Nigeria. Prehistoric inhabitants, adjusting to the
 encroaching desert, were widely scattered by the third millennium B.C.,
 when the desiccation of the Sahara began. Trans-Saharan trade routes
 linked the western Sudan with the Mediterranean from the time of
 Carthage and with the upper Nile from a much earlier date, also
 establishing an avenue of communication and cultural influence that
 remained open until the end of the nineteenth century. By these same
 routes, Islam made its way south into West Africa after the ninth
 century A.D.

By then a string of dynastic states, including the earliest Hausa
 states, stretched across the western and central Sudan. The most
 powerful of these states were Ghana, Gao, and Kanem, which were not
 located within the boundaries of present-day Nigeria but which
 nonetheless had an indirect influence on the history of the Nigerian
 savanna. Ghana declined in the eleventh century but was succeeded by
 Mali, which consolidated much of the western Sudan under its imperial
 rule in the thirteenth century. Songhai emerged as an empire out of the
 small state of Gao in the fifteenth century. For a century, Songhai paid
 homage to Mali, but by the last decade of the fifteenth century it
 attained its independence and brought much of the Malian domains under
 its imperial sway. Although these western empires had little political
 influence on the savanna states of Nigeria before 1500, they had a
 strong cultural and economic impact that became more pronounced in the
 sixteenth century, especially because these states became associated
 with the spread of Islam and trade. In the sixteenth century, moreover,
 much of northern Nigeria paid homage to Songhai in the west or to Borno,
 a rival empire in the east.

Borno's history is closely associated with Kanem, which had achieved
 imperial status in the Lake Chad basin by the thirteenth century. Kanem
 expanded westward to include the area that became Borno. Its dynasty,
 the Sayfawa, was descended from pastoralists who had settled in the Lake
 Chad region in the seventh century. The mai (king) of Kanem
 ruled in conjunction with a council of peers as a constitutional
 monarch. In the eleventh century, the mai and his court
 accepted Islam, as the western empires also had done. Islam was used to
 reinforce the political and social structures of the state, although
 many established customs were maintained. Women, for example, continued
 to exercise considerable political influence.

The mai employed his mounted bodyguard, composed of abid
 (slave-soldiers), and an inchoate army of nobles to extend Kanem's
 authority into Borno, on the western shore of Lake Chad. By tradition
 the territory was conferred on the heir to the throne to govern during
 his apprenticeship. In the fourteenth century, however, dynastic
 conflict forced the then-ruling group and its followers to relocate in
 Borno, where as a result the Kanuri emerged as an ethnic group in the
 late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The civil war that disrupted
 Kanem in the second half of the fourteenth century resulted in the
 independence of Borno.

Borno's prosperity depended on its stake in the trans-Sudanic slave
 trade and the desert trade in salt and livestock. The need to protect
 its commercial interests compelled Borno to intervene in Kanem, which
 continued to be a theater of war throughout the fifteenth and into the
 sixteenth centuries. Despite its relative political weakness in this
 period, Borno's court and mosques under the patronage of a line of
 scholarly kings earned fame as centers of Islamic culture and learning.

By the eleventh century, some of the Hausa states--such as those at
 Kano, Katsina, and Gobir--had developed into walled towns that engaged
 in trade and serviced caravans as well as manufactured cloth and leather
 goods. Millet, sorghum, sugarcane, and cotton were produced in the
 surrounding countryside, which also provided grazing land for cattle.
 Until the fifteenth century, the small Hausa states were on the
 periphery of the major empires of the era.

According to tradition, the Hausa rulers descended from a
 "founding hero" named Bayinjida, supposedly of Middle Eastern
 origin, who became sarki (king) of Daura after subduing a snake
 and marrying the queen of Daura. Their children founded the other Hausa
 towns, which traditionally are referred to as the Hausa bakwai
 (Hausa seven). Wedged in among the stronger Sudanic kingdoms, each of
 the Hausa states acquired special military, economic, or religious
 functions. No one state dominated the others, but at various times
 different states assumed a leading role. They were under constant
 pressure from Songhai to the west and Kanem-Borno to the east, to which
 they paid tribute. Armed conflict usually was motivated by economic
 concerns, as coalitions of Hausa states mounted wars, against the Jukun
 and Nupe in the middle belt to collect slaves, or against one another
 for control of important trade routes.

Commerce was in the hands of commoners. Within the cities, trades
 were organized through guilds, each of which was selfregulating and
 collected taxes from its members to be transmitted to the sarki
 as a pledge of loyalty. In return, the king guaranteed the security of
 the guild's trade. The surrounding countryside produced grain for local
 consumption and cotton and hides for processing.

Islam was introduced to Hausaland along the caravan routes. The
 famous Kano Chronicle records the conversion of Kano's ruling dynasty by
 clerics from Mali, demonstrating that the imperial influence of Mali
 extended far to the east. Acceptance of Islam was gradual and was often
 nominal in the countryside, where folk religion continued to exert a
 strong influence. Non-Islamic practices also were retained in the court
 ceremonies of the Hausa kings. Nonetheless, Kano and Katsina, with their
 famous mosques and schools, came to participate fully in the cultural
 and intellectual life of the Islamic world.

Fulbe pastoralists, known in Nigeria as Fulani, began to enter the
 Hausa country in the thirteenth century, and by the fifteenth century
 they were tending cattle, sheep, and goats in Borno as well. The Fulani
 came from the Senegal River valley, where their ancestors had developed
 a method of livestock management and specialization based on
 transhumance. The movement of cattle along north/south corridors in
 pursuit of grazing and water followed the climatic pattern of the rainy
 and dry seasons. Gradually, the pastoralists moved eastward, first into
 the centers of the Mali and Songhai empires and eventually into
 Hausaland and Borno. Some Fulbe converted to Islam in the Senegal region
 as early as the eleventh century, and one group of Muslim Fulani settled
 in the cities and mingled freely with the Hausa, from whom they became
 racially indistinguishable. There, they constituted a devoutly
 religious, educated elite who made themselves indispensable to the Hausa
 kings as government advisers, Islamic judges, and teachers. Other
 Fulani, the lighter-skinned pastoral nomads, remained aloof from the
 Hausa and in some measure from Islam as well, herding cattle outside the
 cities and seeking pastures for their herds.