Gowon's influence depended upon his position as chairman of the
 Supreme Military Council, which had come into existence in March 1967.
 The council included top-ranking staff officers, service and police
 heads, state military governors, and the civilian administrator of the
 East Central State. Gowon also chaired the Federal Executive Council,
 the cabinet of ministers composed of military officers and civilian
 technocrats. The regime ruled by decree, although the concurrence of
 state military governors was sought before decrees were issued.

In October 1970, Gowon announced his intention to stay in power until
 1976, which was set as the target year for completion of the military's
 political program and the return to an elected civilian government.
 Gowon outlined a nine-point program that would enable the military to
 relinquish control. Included in the package were reorganization of the
 armed forces; implementation of a national economic development plan,
 including reconstruction of war damaged areas, eradication of
 corruption; establishment of more states; adoption of a new
 constitution; introduction of a formula for allocating revenue;
 completion of a national census; organization of national political
 parties; and elections at federal and state levels. Criticism of the
 six-year plan was widespread because the agenda was so broad. Many
 Nigerians feared that the military planned to retain power indefinitely.
 The reaction of civilian politicians was particularly negative. Muslim
 traditionalists also expressed concerns that military rule, with its
 modernizing tendencies, would erode the authority of the emirates.

Foreign Policy

Gowon reaffirmed the priorities in foreign policy established at
 independence. These included active participation in the UN, advocacy of
 pan-African solidarity through the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
 regional cooperation, support for anticolonial and liberation
 movements--particularly those in southern Africa--and nonalignment in
 the East-West conflict. The role of Nigeria in world affairs, outside
 its African concerns, was insignificant, however.

Nigeria was admitted to the UN within a week of independence in 1960.
 It was represented on the committees of specialized agencies and took
 its turn as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council. One of
 Nigeria's earliest and most significant contributions to the UN was to
 furnish troops for the peacekeeping operation in Zaire in the early
 1960s. By 1964 Nigerian army units, under Ironsi's command, formed the
 backbone of the UN force. The FMG was committed to eliminating
 whiteminority rule in Africa, and it channeled financial and military
 aid to liberation movements through the OAU.

Although there was considerable African criticism of Nigeria during
 the civil war, the military government resisted this pressure as
 interference in the country's internal affairs. An OAU statement in 1967
 backing the federal position on national unity assuaged Nigerian
 feelings to some extent, but Lagos protested subsequent OAU efforts to
 bring about a cease-fire. When the war ended, Nigeria's participation in
 OAU activities returned to normal.

There were minor problems relating to border demarcations with
 neighboring countries, but these were resolved to the satisfaction of
 the parties involved. Relations also were mended with African states
 that had recognized Biafra. Particularly close ties were developed with
 the military regime in Ghana, which gave full support to the federal
 government during the civil war. In 1975 Nigeria joined other West
 African countries in creating the Economic Community of West African
 States (ECOWAS), whose mandate was the reduction of trade barriers among
 countries in the region. Sponsored by Gowon, the agreement was
 indicative of the government's concern with improving intraregional
 economic ties.

Nigeria played an active role in the Commonwealth, which linked
 Nigeria to developing countries outside Africa and complemented regional
 ties through ECOWAS and the OAU. Financial and technical assistance was
 channeled to Nigeria through the Commonwealth. The aid came from
 Britain, Canada, and Australia, with which Nigeria had advantageous
 trade relations. Nigeria's interaction with Britain continued to be
 cooperative, although the renewal of arms sales to South Africa,
 permitted by the Conservative British government in the early 1970s,
 caused some strain in Nigeria. Relations cooled even more because of
 Nigeria's apprehension over Britain's application for entry into the
 European Economic Community (EEC). Nigeria feared that it would suffer
 economically as a result of British membership in the EEC.

The FMG was committed to the principle of nonalignment, a policy
 initially established in the early years of independence. Acceptance of
 Western aid--including US$225 million from the United States in the
 early years of independence--tended to undermine this position. Nigeria
 had begun to move toward a more autonomous position in 1962, when the
 Anglo-Nigerian Defense Pact was abrogated. With this step, Nigeria
 affirmed its independence of British foreign policy to which it had
 adhered since achieving nationhood. The abrogation of the pact was a
 clear message of nonalignment. During the war, the federal government
 accepted assistance from both East and West. Aircraft and heavy
 equipment were purchased from the Soviet Union, for example, because
 Britain and the United States refused to supply heavy armaments.
 Nigeria's relations with the United States were good, largely because
 the United States provided financial aid and recognized the FMG during
 the civil war. United States ties with South Africa and Portugal caused
 some friction on the official level, and there was considerable
 criticism in the Nigerian press. The Nigerian version of nonalignment
 had a slightly pro-Western tilt.

Economic Development

After the civil war, the FMG moved to resurrect the six-year
 development plan inaugurated in 1962. The First National Development
 Plan charted Nigeria's transition from an essentially agricultural
 economy to a mixed economy based on agricultural expansion and limited
 industrial growth. Government was heavily involved in the economy
 because locally generated private investment was unable to generate
 sufficient capital for development. New development plans were
 instituted in 1970 and 1975, but the goals set in all three plans proved
 unrealistic.

By the late 1960s, oil had replaced cocoa, peanuts, and palm products
 as the country's biggest foreign exchange earner. In 1971 Nigeria--by
 then the world's seventh-largest petroleum producer--became a member of
 the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). The
 dramatic rise in world oil prices in 1974 caused a sudden flood of
 wealth that can be described as "dynamic chaos." Much of the
 revenue was intended for investment to diversify the economy, but it
 also spurred inflation and, coming in the midst of widespread
 unemployment, underscored inequities in distribution. In 1975 production
 fell sharply as a result of the sudden decrease in world demand, and
 prices moved downward until late in the year when OPEC intervened to
 raise prices. Nigeria fully supported OPEC policies.

In 1972 the government issued an indigenization decree, the first of
 a number of Nigerian Enterprises Promotion decrees, that barred aliens
 from investing in specified enterprises and reserved participation in
 certain trades to Nigerians. At the time, about 70 percent of commercial
 firms operating in Nigeria were foreign-owned. In 1975 the federal
 government bought 60 percent of the equity in the marketing operations
 of the major oil companies in Nigeria, but full nationalization was
 rejected as a means of furthering its program of indigenization.

Unemployment constituted an increasingly serious problem. Large
 numbers of farm workers, who had gone to urban areas in search of higher
 wages, remained in the cities even if they failed to find jobs, while
 school graduates and dropouts flooded the labor market at a rate of
 600,000 a year in the mid-1970s. Unemployment reached its highest levels
 in the crowded Igbo areas in the east, where the economy still was
 recovering from the effects of the war. Skilled workers were reluctant
 to leave the east in search of work, although eventually the shortage of
 skilled workers in other parts of the country began to have its effect
 in overcoming Igbo fears. The dangers involved in discharging large
 numbers of soldiers who had no job prospects made demobilization of the
 costly military establishment undesirable. Substantial increases in
 public-sector employment promised to absorb some of the soldiers, but
 they lacked training. These economic problems assumed an imposing
 political dimension. To some extent, they reflected a pattern in the
 world economic situation, but the popular imagination blamed corruption
 and mismanagement and held the Gowon regime responsible.

The regime also had to deal with a severe drought that struck the
 northern states between 1972 and 1974. The drought was the most serious
 since that of 1913-14. The drought and resulting famine affected the
 Sahel countries to the west, north, and east far more than Nigeria, but
 considerable numbers of refugees poured into Nigeria from Niger. Famine
 conditions also prevailed in some parts of the north of Nigeria. In the
 long run, however, Nigerian agriculture benefited from the rise in
 prices that resulted from crop failures in other parts of the Sahel. In
 the short run, the drought influenced policy decisions about the
 necessity of promoting irrigation schemes and reforestation.

Crime, Corruption, and Political Turbulence

In 1972 Gowon partially lifted the ban on political activity that had
 been in force since 1966 in order to permit a discussion of a new
 constitution that would prepare the way for civilian rule. The debate
 that followed was ideologically charged. Awolowo's call for a transition
 to "democratic socialism" made the military particularly
 nervous. The press, trade unions, and universities demanded a quick
 return to the democratic process. The call for new states was loud, but
 there was no agreement over how many there should be. Gowon abruptly
 ended public discussion, explaining that "peace is more important
 than politics."

The decennial census was scheduled for 1973. Under the banner
 "Prepare to be Counted," the military government conducted a
 public campaign that emphasized the technical rather than political
 dimensions of the exercise. The procedure was to be supervised by a
 committee whose members were selected carefully for geographical and
 ethnic balance, and computers were to be used for processing the
 returns. Despite measures taken to ensure a more accurate count than had
 been possible before, the results once again confounded demographers:
 the census found that Nigeria's population had increased by nearly 44
 percent in 10 years, a rate of growth unprecedented in any developing
 country. According to the returns submitted, the north contained 64
 percent of the total population, compared with 53.7 percent in 1963, a
 figure even then believed to be exaggerated. The 1973 census, on which
 representation in a new, elected parliament would be based, revived
 fears that one ethnic group would permanently dominate the others. It
 also meant that a considerable share of oil revenues would flow to the
 northern states under the existing system of allocation. The government
 failed in its efforts to sell the census as a technical exercise because
 the political implications were widely understood and hotly debated,
 despite the ban on political discussion.

The Gowon regime came under fire because of widespread and obvious
 corruption at every level of national life. Graft, bribery, and nepotism
 were an integral part of a complex system of patronage and
 "gift" giving through which influence and authority were
 asserted. Although the military had pledged to rid the government of
 corruption, the public became increasingly aware of abuses, primarily
 because of daily exposés in the press. In 1973 the federal government
 established a special anticorruption police force--the
 "X-Squad"--whose subsequent investigations revealed ingenious
 forms of extortion and fraud-- not only in government and public
 corporations but in private business and in the professions as well.

A major scandal that had international implications and reached the
 highest levels of government and the business community took place in
 the mid-1970s; it involved the purchase abroad of construction materials
 by state agents at prices well above market values. Rake-offs were
 pocketed by public officials and private contractors. Other scandals in
 hospitals and orphanages shocked the populace, while corruption in
 importing medical drugs whose effective dates long since had expired
 revealed that even the health of Nigerians was at risk.

Inefficiencies compounded the impact of corruption. In mid1975 , 400
 cargo ships--250 of them carrying 1.5 million tons of cement--clogged
 the harbor of Lagos, which had been paralyzed for fifteen months with
 vessels waiting to be unloaded. To compound the error, spoiled and
 inferior-grade cement was concealed by mixing it with acceptable
 material for use in public building projects. Later, buildings collapsed
 or had to be dismantled because of the inferior product. New roads
 washed away because of bad construction and inadequate controls. In
 these scandals, as in others, the culprits were a combination of
 Nigerian businessmen, government officials, and foreign companies. Few
 people and few projects seemed exempt from the scourge.

Crime posed a threat to internal security and had a seriously
 negative impact on efforts to bring about economic development. Armed
 gangs, often composed of former soldiers, roamed the countryside
 engaging in robbery, extortion, and kidnapping. The gangs sometimes
 operated with the connivance of the police or included moonlighting
 soldiers. Pirates raided cargo ships awaiting entry to ports or unloaded
 them at the piers ahead of the stevedores. Drug trafficking and
 smuggling were prevalent. Punishment was meted out to large batches of
 convicted and suspected criminals, who were dispatched by firing squads
 in public executions meant to impress spectators with the seriousness of
 the offenses and with the government's concern to curb crime. These
 measures had no noticeable effect on the crime rate, however, but seemed
 rather to provoke a callous public attitude toward violence.

In January 1975, Gowon revamped the membership of the Federal
 Executive Council, increasing the number of military ministers. He
 depended more and more on a small group of advisers and became
 increasingly inaccessible to his military colleagues. Without broad
 consultation, he backed off from the 1976 date set for a return to
 civilian rule, explaining that to adhere rigidly to it would
 "amount to a betrayal of a trust" and "certainly throw
 the nation back into confusion." Public employees staged protest
 strikes in May and June that brought essential services to a standstill.
 The government responded by granting retroactive wage increases that
 averaged 30 percent, which fed inflation and led to industrial strikes
 as union members demanded parallel raises.

The political atmosphere deteriorated to the point that Gowon was
 deposed in a bloodless coup d'état July 29, 1975--the ninth anniversary
 of the revolt that had brought him to power. At the time, Gowon was at
 an OAU summit meeting in Kampala, Uganda. The perpetrators of the coup
 included many of the officers who had participated in the July 1966
 coup. Even the officers responsible for Gowon's security were involved.
 Gowon pledged his full loyalty to the new regime and left for exile in
 Britain, where he received a pension from the Nigerian government.