Christianity was introduced at Benin in the fifteenth century by
 Portuguese Roman Catholic priests who accompanied traders and officials
 to the West African coast. Several churches were built to serve the
 Portuguese community and a small number of African converts. When direct
 Portuguese contacts in the region were withdrawn, however, the influence
 of the Catholic missionaries waned and by the eighteenth century had
 disappeared.

Although churchmen in Britain had been influential in the drive to
 abolish the slave trade, significant missionary activity was renewed
 only in the 1840s and was confined for some time to the area between
 Lagos and Ibadan. The first missions there were opened by the Church of
 England's Church Missionary Society (CMS). They were followed by other
 Protestant denominations from Britain, Canada, and the United States and
 in the 1860s by Roman Catholic religious orders. Protestant missionaries
 tended to divide the country into spheres of activity to avoid
 competition with each other, and Catholic missions similarly avoided
 duplication of effort among the several religious orders working there.
 Catholic missionaries were particularly active among the Igbo, the CMS
 among the Yoruba.

The CMS initially promoted Africans to responsible positions in the
 mission field, an outstanding example being the appointment of Samuel
 Adjai Crowther as the first Anglican bishop of the Niger. Crowther, a
 liberated Yoruba slave, had been educated in Sierra Leone and in
 Britain, where he was ordained before returning to his homeland with the
 first group of missionaries sent there by the CMS. This was part of a
 conscious "native church" policy pursued by the Anglicans and
 others to create indigenous ecclesiastical institutions that eventually
 would be independent of European tutelage. The effort failed in part,
 however, because church authorities came to think that religious
 discipline had grown too lax during Crowther's episcopate but especially
 because of the rise of prejudice. Crowther was succeeded as bishop by a
 British cleric. Nevertheless, the acceptance of Christianity by large
 numbers of Nigerians depended finally on the various denominations
 coming to terms with local conditions and involved participation of an
 increasingly high proportion of African clergy in the missions.

In large measure, European missionaries were convinced of the value
 of colonial rule, thereby reinforcing colonial policy. In reaction some
 African Christian communities formed their own independent churches.