British expansion accelerated in the last decades of the nineteenth
 century. The early history of Lagos Colony was one of repeated attempts
 to end the Yoruba wars. In the face of threats to the divided Yoruba
 states from Dahomey and the Sokoto Caliphate, as represented by the
 emirate of Ilorin, the British governor--assisted by the CMS--succeeded
 in imposing peace settlements on the interior.

Colonial Lagos was a busy, cosmopolitan port, reflecting Victorian
 and distinctively Brazilian architecture and the varied backgrounds of a
 black elite, composed of English-speakers from Sierra Leone and of
 emancipated slaves repatriated from Brazil and Cuba. Its residents were
 employed in official capacities and were active in business. Africans
 also were represented on the Lagos Legislative Council, a largely
 appointed assembly.

After the Berlin Conference, Britain announced formation of the Oil
 Rivers Protectorate, which included the Niger Delta and extended
 eastward to Calabar, where the British consulate general was relocated
 from Fernando Po. The essential purpose of the protectorate was to
 control trade coming down the Niger. Vice consuls were assigned to ports
 that already had concluded treaties of cooperation with the Foreign
 Office. Local rulers continued to administer their territories, but
 consular authorities assumed jurisdiction for the equity courts
 established earlier by the foreign mercantile communities. A
 constabulary force was raised and used to pacify the coastal area. In
 1894 the territory was redesignated the Niger Coast Protectorate and was
 expanded to include the region from Calabar to Lagos Colony and
 Protectorate, including the hinterland, and northward up the Niger River
 as far as Lokoja, the headquarters of the Royal Niger Company. As a
 protectorate, it did not have the status of a colony but remained under
 the jurisdiction of the Foreign Office.

Continued expansion of the protectorate was accomplished largely by
 diplomatic means, although military force was employed to bring Ijebu,
 Oyo, and Benin into compliance with dictated treaty obligations. The
 conquest of Benin in 1897 completed the British occupation of
 southwestern Nigeria. The incident that sparked the expedition was the
 massacre of a British consul and his party, which was on its way to
 investigate reports of ritual human sacrifice in the city of Benin. In
 reprisal a marine detachment promptly stormed the city and destroyed the
 oba's palace. The reigning oba was sent into exile,
 and Benin was administered indirectly under the protectorate through a
 council of chiefs.

Although treaties were signed with rulers as far north as Sokoto by
 1885, actual British control was confined to the coastal area and the
 immediate vicinity of Lokoja until 1900. The Royal Niger Company had
 access to the territory from Lokoja extending along the Niger and Benue
 rivers above their confluence, but there was no effective control, even
 after punitive expeditions against Bida and Ilorin in 1897. The clear
 intent was to occupy the Sokoto Caliphate, but for that purpose the
 Royal Niger Company was not deemed to be a sufficient instrument of
 imperialism. Consequently, on December 31, 1899, Britain terminated the
 charter of the company, providing compensation and retention of valuable
 mineral rights.