On December 31, 1983, the military seized power once again, primarily
 because there was virtually no confidence in the civilian regime. The
 fraudulent election was used as an excuse for the takeover, although the
 military was in fact closely associated with the ousted government. More
 serious still, the economy was in chaos. The true cost of the failure to
 use earlier revenues and foreign reserves to good effect now became
 apparent.

The leader of the coup d'état was Major General Muhammadu Buhari of
 Katsina, whose background and political loyalties tied him closely to
 the Muslim north and the deposed government. Buhari had been director of
 supply and services in the early 1970s, military governor of Northeast
 State at the time it was divided into three states, and federal
 commissioner for petroleum and mines (1976-78) during the height of the
 oil boom. At the time of the coup, he was commander of the Third Armored
 Division in Jos.

Buhari tried to restore public accountability and to reestablish a
 dynamic economy without altering the basic power structure of the
 country. The military had become impatient with the civilian government.
 Corruption in particular was out of control, and the fraudulent election
 had been too obvious. Because the civilians in the NPN could not control
 the situation, the military would try its hand. Nonetheless, Buhari's
 political and economic aims were almost identical to those of the NPN.

The military regime conducted tribunals to curb corruption, and many
 scandals were revealed. Once again the civil service was cleansed,
 although on a smaller scale than the purge of 1975. This time, however,
 the military tried to achieve two aims. First, it attempted to secure
 public support by reducing the level of corruption; second, it
 demonstrated its commitment to austerity by trimming the federal budget.
 As a further attempt to mobilize the country, Buhari launched a War
 Against Indiscipline in spring 1984. This national campaign, which
 lasted fifteen months, preached the work ethic, emphasized patriotism,
 decried corruption, and promoted environmental sanitation.

The campaign was a military program for reform and mobilization that
 achieved few of its aims. In practice, unemployment was on the rise as
 the recession worsened, so that speeches about working hard seemed out
 of place. The appeal to Nigerian nationalism had the negative effect of
 restricting the flexibility of the government in international
 negotiations over the debt. The campaign was enforced haphazardly; some
 people were executed or given long jail terms while others were allowed
 off if they were well-connected. Environmental sanitation meant that the
 state capitals had to be cleaned up, and the principal target was the
 petty bourgeoisie that eked a living out of selling services or
 retailing commodities on a small scale. Their "illegal
 structures"--market stalls and workshops along the streets--were
 destroyed, and widespread resentment resulted among the small traders,
 repairmen, and others in the self-employed service sector.

The regime attempted to stifle criticism. Journalists were harassed,
 and many critics were arrested. Symbolically, the arrest of the popular
 musician, Fela Ransome-Kuti, personified the crackdown. Ransome-Kuti's
 lyrics sharply mocked the government's inability to deal with national
 problems. The National Security Organisation (NSO) became the principal
 instrument of repression. The NSO, created in 1976, had played only a
 marginal role in Nigerian politics until the Buhari regime. Buhari
 appointed Rafindadi, a civilian, as head of the NSO, and under
 Rafindadi, Nigeria experienced the harassment and insecurity of a secret
 police force for the first time. Fortunately, the NSO proved to be
 inefficient, and subsequent reaction to its operations led to its
 reorganization.

Buhari's biggest problem was Nigeria's foreign debt. Negotiations
 with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) dragged on, and in the end
 efforts to reschedule the debt failed. Although Buhari was committed to
 austerity, the IMF insisted on even more drastic measures to cut
 spending, devalue the currency, and otherwise restructure the economy
 than most Nigerians were willing to accept. Buhari had to accede to the
 strong and vocal opposition to the IMF terms. Nigerian nationalism won
 out over economic necessity, at least in the short run. Furthermore, by
 the end of 1985 there was considerable frustration within the army. The
 army had been reduced in size steadily since the end of the civil war,
 from a total of about 275,000 in 1969 to about 80,000 by the end of the
 1980s. The economic crisis, the campaign against corruption, and
 civilian criticism of the military undermined Buhari's position, and in
 August 1985 a group of officers under Major General Ibrahim Babangida
 removed Buhari from power.

The officers who staged the coup were mostly from the north, but
 unlike Buhari (of Hausa origin), they were mostly from minority ethnic
 groups. Babangida, for example, was of Gwari origin from Niger state. He
 was a member of the Supreme Military Council under the Murtala Muhammad,
 Obasanjo, and Buhari regimes and had been involved in the 1975 and 1984
 coups. Lieutenant General Domkat Bali became chairman of the Joint
 Chiefs of Staff. The Armed Forces Ruling Council (which succeeded the
 Supreme Military Council) was dominated by minority groups from the
 north. Some radicals and technocrats were appointed to ministerial
 positions.

The new regime was committed to a return to civilian rule and
 supported the 1979 constitution. Babangida assumed the title of
 president, which he justified in terms of the Constitution. Furthermore,
 he tried to assuage the unrest in the country by correcting the excesses
 of the Buhari regime. The NSO was abolished in 1986, and its duties were
 reassigned to less threatening bodies. The freewheeling press was
 allowed fuller rein again, although there was still occasional
 harassment. Trials of former politicians were ended, and many former
 officials who had been convicted were released from jail. In 1987 the
 regime decreed that all politicians who had held office since 1960 and
 who had been convicted of criminal offenses were banned from politics.

The Babangida regime had a rocky start. A countercoup in December
 1985 failed but made it clear that not everyone in the military sided
 with the Armed Forces Ruling Council. The most serious opposition
 centered in the labor movement and on the university campuses. In May
 1986, students at Ahmadu Bello University and Kaduna Polytechnic staged
 demonstrations that led to military occupation of those campuses and to
 the deaths of a number of students. The student movement had
 considerable support at other universities. On June 4, 1986, the
 Nigerian Labour Congress in alliance with students and university
 teachers organized a national day of sympathy, which led to the arrest
 of many union leaders. There was also considerable controversy over
 Nigeria's entry into the Organization of the Islamic Conference, an
 international body of Muslim states, in 1986. Buhari's regime had made
 the application, which Babangida allowed to stand. The strong reaction
 among many Christians, led by the Christian Association of Nigeria
 (formed in 1976), proved to be an embarrassment to the regime.

Babangida addressed the worsening recession through the structural
 adjustment program of 1986. By 1986, 44 percent of export earnings was
 being used to service the foreign debt. Austerity was not enough;
 rescheduling the foreign debt was essential, but public opinion was
 against an IMF loan. The government already was committed to many of the
 conditions for the IMF loan, including even more austere measures.
 However, it resisted pressures to reduce the petroleum subsidy, to allow
 trade liberalization, and to devalue the naira. Although negotiations
 with the IMF were suspended, the federal budget of 1986 still imposed
 many of the IMF conditions. On October 1, 1986, the government declared
 a National Economic Emergency, which lasted for fifteen months. Under
 the emergency, the government de-emphasized large-scale agricultural
 projects and introduced salary and wage reductions for armed forces and
 for public- and private-sector employees. Import restrictions were
 intensified, including a 30-percent surcharge on imports. Officially,
 the government now encouraged foreign investment and promoted
 privatization. Finally, the petroleum subsidy was cut back. Despite
 these drastic moves, efforts to reschedule the foreign debt without an
 IMF loan failed, and a drop in world oil prices further compounded
 Nigeria's situation.

Eventually the World Bank stepped into the breach and provided US$4.2
 billion over three years to support the structural adjustment program.
 The eligible debt finally was rescheduled in early 1988. There was heavy
 devaluation of the naira in 1986, followed by even more drastic
 reductions in 1989 and early 1990. As a result of the recession, there
 was a drop in real income, especially for urban dwellers, while
 unemployment rose steadily from a low in 1980 to almost 12 percent in
 1986. The situation in the second half of the 1980s was even worse, with
 per capita income falling below US$300 in 1988.

The Babangida regime appointed a new body, the Political Bureau, in
 January 1986 to make recommendations on the return to civilian rule. Its
 report, submitted in March 1987, was decidedly at odds with the
 government's structural adjustment program. The Political Bureau,
 composed of academics and civil servants, wanted to maintain a strong
 state presence in the economy, while the military regime was steadily
 moving away from that position. The bureau also favored creation of a
 two-party political system that would be broadly social democratic in
 ideology, as a means of escaping from the ethnic-based political parties
 of the past. The Political Bureau also recommended creation of at least
 two new states, Katsina and Akwa Ibom, this was accomplished in 1987.
 Although the Babangida regime did not like many of the Political
 Bureau's recommendations, a Constitution Review Committee was formed in
 September 1987.

This process of review and discussion convinced the military regime
 that the transition to civilian rule should be gradual. The perceived
 mistakes of 1979 and the creation of the Second Republic would not be
 repeated, it was hoped. The military would stay in power through 1989 to
 oversee the transition. The first stage was local elections, held in
 December 1987. No political parties were allowed, and in many districts,
 especially in Lagos, the results were overturned and new elections held.
 In 1990 the military continued in power but still promised a return to
 civilian rule.